{\rtf1\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Times New Roman;}
{\f1\froman Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman Times New Roman;}{\f4\fmodern MS LineDraw;}{\f5\fdecor Symbol;}
}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\paperh3053 \margl3541 \margr662 \margt1495 \margb1440 \plain \lang1033 {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx5684 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl486 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx3154 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl283 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx5391 \ql \sl283 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #3;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx5134 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl265 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #4;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx5489 \ql \sl283 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #5;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx5212 \qc \sl283 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #6;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3491 \ri54 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #7;}
{\s9 \tx56 \tx493 \tqr \tx7301 \qj \li3485 \fi437 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #8;}
}{\pard \posx3591 \posy2665 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1146 \absw5735 \dxfrtext200 \fs49 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx3591 \posy2665 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1146 \absw5735 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-486 \tx50 \tqr \tx5684 Peripherals: Displays, Disk Drives, Printers, and More\par 
}\linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12226 \pgwsxn12240 \pard \sl-486 \tx50 \tqr \tx5684 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4622 \posy4475 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw3205 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \b \pard \s3 \posx4622 \posy4475 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw3205 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx3154 In this chapter you'll learn:\par 
}\pard \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx3154 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5062 \posy4954 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw5442 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx5062 \posy4954 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw5442 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx5391 What "peripherals" are and why they're needed\par 
}\pard \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx5391 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5065 \posy5435 \phpg \pvpg \absh-625 \absw5185 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx5065 \posy5435 \phpg \pvpg \absh-625 \absw5185 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-265 \tx50 \tqr \tx5134 What peripherals are commonly used with the Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \sl-265 \tx50 \tqr \tx5134 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5068 \posy6176 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw5540 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx5068 \posy6176 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw5540 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx5489 What peripherals are available from Commodore\par 
}\pard \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx5489 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5071 \posy6658 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw5263 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s7 \posx5071 \posy6658 \phpg \pvpg \absh-360 \absw5263 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx5212 How peripherals attach to the Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx5212 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4177 \posy7903 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4224 \absw7352 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \plain \fs25 \f2 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx4177 \posy7903 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4224 \absw7352 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri54 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7297 When you buy a car, you probably also purchase a certain number of \fs25 \f3 \b options: \fs25 \f2 \plain \fs25 \f2 \lang1033 probably an automatic transmission and power steering, perhaps air conditioning, or tinted glass, or a stereo tapedeck. Some of these options are essential to the operation of the car, some are conveniences, and some\'97like racing stripes\'97are merely ego\_boosters. A similar situation exists when you buy a computer: there are many options besides the computer itself\'97some essential to the operation of the computer, \fs25 \f3 \b some less essential. \fs25 \f2 \plain \fs25 \f2 \lang1033 In the computer world these options are called "per\-ipherals," meaning that they sit around your computer, on its "periphery." Peripherals commonly used with the Commodore 128 are display devices, disk drives, printers, and modems.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \pard \s9 \posx4177 \posy7903 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4224 \absw7352 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi437 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx56 \tx493 \tqr \tx7301 If you want to see the output from your computer, you'll need some sort of display device: either a TV set or monitor. If you want to store programs or data when the computer is turned off, you'll need either a cassette tape storage device or a disk drive. If you want to print out programs or other data on paper, you'll need a printer; and if you want to\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx56 \tx493 \tqr \tx7301 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li3491 \ri58 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #257;}
{\s3 \tx484 \tqr \tx7290 \qj \li3491 \fi434 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #258;}
{\s4 \tx56 \tx490 \tqr \tx7284 \qj \li3485 \fi434 \ri56 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #259;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx3827 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl328 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #260;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7277 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl257 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #261;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx1993 \ql \sl327 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #262;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #263;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx956 \ql \sl327 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #264;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #265;}
{\s11 \tx53 \tx487 \tqr \tx7289 \qj \li3488 \fi434 \ri54 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #266;}
}\par {\pard \posx2331 \posy1825 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4216 \absw7341 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx2331 \posy1825 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4216 \absw7341 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri58 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7282 communicate over telephone lines with your computer, you'll need a modem. And this is just the beginning; there are many other peripherals as well.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx2331 \posy1825 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4216 \absw7341 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi434 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx484 \tqr \tx7290 Just as it is difficult to decide which options to buy (and which you can afford) when you buy a car, there may seem to be a bewildering array of peripherals to choose for your computer. In this chapter we're going to introduce you to the world of Commodore 128 peripherals, explaining what they are, reviewing what is available in the marketplace, and sug\-\fs25 \f1 \b gesting \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 how to choose which equipment is right for you. We'll then explain just how these peripherals are attached to the Commodore 128. This is not a simple topic. There are so many plugs, openings, ports and connec\-tors of different shapes and sizes on the Commodore 128 that it's necessary to explain which kind of peripheral plugs in where, and why.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx2331 \posy1825 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4216 \absw7341 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi434 \ri56 \sl-261 \tx56 \tx490 \tqr \tx7284 We'll start off by talking about what's already built into the Commo\-dore 128. From this discussion, the reason for needing some peripherals will begin to emerge.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12719 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1700 \margrsxn2507 \pard \sl-261 \tx56 \tx490 \tqr \tx7284 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1750 \posy6282 \phpg \pvpg \absh-778 \absw3878 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs34 \f2 \pard \s5 \posx1750 \posy6282 \phpg \pvpg \absh-778 \absw3878 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-328 \tx50 \tqr \tx3827 What's Already Inside the Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \sl-328 \tx50 \tqr \tx3827 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2349 \posy7096 \phpg \pvpg \absh-827 \absw7328 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx2349 \posy7096 \phpg \pvpg \absh-827 \absw7328 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-257 \tx50 \tqr \tx7277 We've mentioned several different kinds of peripheral devices that may be necessary for your computer system. But what comes with the computer itself? What don't you need to buy?\par 
}\pard \sl-257 \tx50 \tqr \tx7277 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2368 \posy8229 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw2044 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f3 \i \pard \s7 \posx2368 \posy8229 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw2044 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-327 \tx50 \tqr \tx1993 The Keyboard\par 
}\pard \sl-327 \tx50 \tqr \tx1993 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2349 \posy8655 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1361 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx2349 \posy8655 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1361 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7282 As you can see from Figure 1\_1 in the last chapter, the Commodore 128 looks as if it's mostly a keyboard. This keyboard is the way that you, the user, will most commonly put information into the computer. However, the nicely styled plastic case that houses the keyboard contains many other things as well.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7282 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2368 \posy10312 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw1007 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f3 \i \pard \s9 \posx2368 \posy10312 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw1007 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-327 \tx50 \tqr \tx956 Chips\par 
}\pard \sl-327 \tx50 \tqr \tx956 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2340 \posy10739 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s10 \posx2340 \posy10739 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 First and most importantly, the Commodore 128 contains the handful of "chips" (complex circuits etched onto a small crystal of silicon) that control the computer's operation. As a user you probably won't need to know much about these chips. If you're not interested in technical details, you can skip the next few paragraphs.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s11 \posx2340 \posy10739 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \fi434 \ri54 \sl-262 \tx53 \tx487 \tqr \tx7289 At the heart of the Commodore 128's circuitry is the 8502 micropro\-cessor. This chip is a close cousin of the 6502 chip which powers the\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx53 \tx487 \tqr \tx7289 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #513;}
{\s3 \tx53 \tx489 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li3488 \fi436 \ri52 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #514;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx1250 \ql \sl304 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #515;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7301 \qj \li3491 \ri54 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #516;}
{\s6 \tx66 \tx511 \tqr \tx7305 \qj \li3475 \fi445 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #517;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx1593 \ql \sl304 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #518;}
{\s8 \tx62 \tqr \tx7305 \qj \li3479 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #519;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tx486 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3491 \fi436 \ri58 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #520;}
}\par {\pard \posx4120 \posy1645 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3440 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx4120 \posy1645 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3440 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7297 Apple II, Atari, and other computers. The 8502 controls the operation of the Commodore when it is in C64 mode and C128 mode. In CP/M mode, an entirely different microprocessor is used, the Z80A.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4120 \posy1645 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3440 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \fi436 \ri52 \sl-260 \tx53 \tx489 \tqr \tx7295 In addition to the microprocessor chips, the Commodore 128 also has specialized chips to control graphics, sound, and communication with peripheral devices. Graphics is handled by a chip called the VIC II, for "Video Interface Chip." In 80\_column mode (which we'll discuss below), another chip is used, the 8563, which can display twice as many dots per line as the VIC II chip. Sound is controlled by the SID, or "Sound Interface Device." The SID chip is the same one that was used in the Commodore 64 computer. There are two chips to handle communications with peripheral devices: they're called CIAs, for "Complex Interface Adaptors."\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn11969 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4065 \margrsxn700 \pard \sl-260 \tx53 \tx489 \tqr \tx7295 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4140 \posy5388 \phpg \pvpg \absh-384 \absw1301 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs27 \f1 \i \b \pard \s4 \posx4140 \posy5388 \phpg \pvpg \absh-384 \absw1301 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1250 Memory\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1250 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4115 \posy5817 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3445 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx4115 \posy5817 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3445 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri54 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7301 There are other chips which constitute the memory of the Commodore 128. The memory is divided into two parts: a permanent part which is filled with information at the factory, called ROM (for Read Only Memory); and a temporary part which can hold programs or data generated by the user, called RAM (Random Access Memory). The Commodore 128, as its name implies, contains 128K of RAM memory. (One "K" is equivalent to 1024 bytes (or characters), so the C128 actually holds 131,072 bytes). This is twice as much as the Commodore 64.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx4115 \posy5817 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3445 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li66 \fi445 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx66 \tx511 \tqr \tx7305 Something to remember about the RAM in your computer is that any programs or data that are stored in it will disappear when the power is turned off. Thus it is not a good place for permanent storage of programs or data. We'll have more to say about this when we talk about cassettes and disk drives.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx66 \tx511 \tqr \tx7305 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4162 \posy9566 \phpg \pvpg \absh-384 \absw1644 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs27 \f1 \i \b \pard \s7 \posx4162 \posy9566 \phpg \pvpg \absh-384 \absw1644 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1593 Connectors\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1593 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4135 \posy9990 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1880 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx4135 \posy9990 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1880 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li62 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx62 \tqr \tx7305 The last major category of components built into the Commodore 128 itself is the various plugs and connectors which allow it to communicate with its peripheral devices. We'll cover these in the last part of the chapter.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx4135 \posy9990 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1880 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi436 \ri58 \sl-262 \tx50 \tx486 \tqr \tx7297 In the sections that follow we'll talk in turn about each of the broad categories of peripherals; then we'll discuss how these devices are con\-nected to the C128. In later chapters we'll talk more about the kinds of peripherals which are particularly suitable for each of the three modes.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tx486 \tqr \tx7297 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx2438 \ql \sl348 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #769;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx7284 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #770;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx1636 \ql \sl304 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #771;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7281 \qj \li3491 \ri53 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #772;}
{\s6 \tx53 \tx493 \tqr \tx7284 \qj \li3488 \fi440 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #773;}
{\s7 \tx53 \tx493 \tqr \tx7283 \qj \li3488 \fi440 \ri51 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #774;}
{\s8 \tx70 \tqr \tx4212 \ql \sl304 \li3471 \ri3099 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #775;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl250 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #776;}
}\par {\pard \posx1956 \posy761 \phpg \pvpg \absh-411 \absw2489 \dxfrtext200 \fs32 \f0 \b \pard \s2 \posx1956 \posy761 \phpg \pvpg \absh-411 \absw2489 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx2438 Display Devices\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pghsxn12240 \pgwsxn9931 \marglsxn1906 \margrsxn0 \pard \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx2438 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2540 \posy1227 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2656 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s3 \posx2540 \posy1227 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2656 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7284 A display device is the only peripheral you absolutely must have to operate your Commodore 128. This display device can be an ordinary TV set, or it can be a video monitor. What's a monitor? It's very similar to a TV set, except that it can't receive TV broadcasts. Thus it offers a sharper picture than a TV set, because the signals from the computer don't need to go through the complex circuitry intended for TV broadcast reception. There are several different types of monitors, so choosing a display device is not a simple task. It depends on what you want to use your computer for, how good a picture you like to look at, and how much you want to spend. Let's review the available options.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7284 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2576 \posy4186 \phpg \pvpg \absh-384 \absw1687 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f2 \i \b \pard \s4 \posx2576 \posy4186 \phpg \pvpg \absh-384 \absw1687 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1636 The TV Set\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1636 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2547 \posy4620 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5529 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx2547 \posy4620 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5529 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri53 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7281 The least expensive display device for your Commodore 128 is an ordinary home TV set. This is an excellent choice if you want to play games or use other simple programs. For these uses a color set is preferable, since almost all computer games make use of color. Since almost everyone has a TV set, this option usually doesn't cost you anything. Of course, if you only have one TV set, and you want to use your computer in a different room than where you usually watch TV, then you might find yourself wanting a second TV set; a somewhat more expensive proposition. In this case you should consider a monitor, to be described below.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx2547 \posy4620 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5529 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx53 \tx493 \tqr \tx7284 To use your TV set with the computer you'll need a small box which contains a switch, so you can switch the TV back and forth between the computer and the normal TV antenna. This box is provided by Commodore along with the the C128. To use it, simply plug the cable from the computer into the switchbox, and plug another cable coming from the box into your TV set.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s7 \posx2547 \posy4620 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5529 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \fi440 \ri51 \sl-261 \tx53 \tx493 \tqr \tx7283 The major disadvantage of a TV set is that the resolution, or amount of detail you can see, in a TV image is fairly limited. For pictures\'97such as those you'll find in games and simple educational programs\'97a TV set works very well. But for text\'97such as program listings\'97it is less satisfactory: the letters and words are somewhat fuzzy, and can be tiring to read.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx53 \tx493 \tqr \tx7283 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2557 \posy10452 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1238 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f2 \i \b \pard \s8 \posx2557 \posy10452 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1238 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \li70 \ri3099 \sl-304 \tx70 \tqr \tx4212 The Direct Video Color Monitor\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \b \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s9 \posx2557 \posy10452 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1238 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-250 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 Because text can be difficult to read on a TV set, different kinds of monitors are available, all of which offer clearer pictures than the standard TV does. You should consider a monitor if you will \fs25 \f3 \b be using your \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 computer\par 
}\pard \sl-250 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li3491 \ri72 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1025;}
{\s3 \tx51 \tx487 \tqr \tx7310 \qj \li3490 \fi436 \ri53 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1026;}
{\s4 \tx58 \tx494 \tqr \tx7313 \qj \li3483 \fi436 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1027;}
{\s5 \tx59 \tx495 \tqr \tx7313 \qj \li3482 \fi436 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1028;}
{\s6 \tx65 \tqr \tx3996 \ql \sl319 \li3476 \ri3353 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1029;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li3491 \ri57 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1030;}
{\s8 \tx54 \tx489 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3487 \fi435 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1031;}
}\par {\pard \posx4053 \posy1760 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6828 \absw7364 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx4053 \posy1760 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6828 \absw7364 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri72 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 for writing with a word\_processing program, or for working with spread\-sheet or financial programs, or if you plan to spend a substantial amount of time writing your own programs. You might even want a monitor simply because you don't have a TV, or don't want to use your TV with your computer.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4053 \posy1760 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6828 \absw7364 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \fi436 \ri53 \sl-260 \tx51 \tx487 \tqr \tx7310 The least expensive color monitor available for the Commodore 128 is called a direct monitor, because the picture signals from the computer don't go through the broadcast\_decoding circuitry as they do on a standard TV set. Here, one cable plugs into the computer, but is split into three separate plugs where it plugs into the monitor: one wire for sound, and two for special picture signals called lump and chrome. Commodore is unique among makers of small computers in using this kind of monitor. Most computer\_makers use something called a composite monitor, in which the luma and chroma signals are combined in one wire. The Commodore approach offers a clearer picture, but you must buy a special monitor, made by Commodore, to take advantage of the system.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx4053 \posy1760 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6828 \absw7364 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li58 \fi436 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx58 \tx494 \tqr \tx7313 Commodore builds a direct monitor which has been very popular with users of the Commodore 64 computer: the 1702 color video monitor. You can also use a composite monitor, although the picture will not be quite as sharp. Other manufacturers produce inexpensive (under $200) composite monitors. Somewhat higher\_quality composite monitors cost around $350.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx4053 \posy1760 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6828 \absw7364 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \fi436 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx59 \tx495 \tqr \tx7313 Although a direct monitor offers a clearer picture than you might obtain with a TV set, it may still not be clear enough for all purposes. Specifically, it will display 40 columns of characters, but not 80. Let's see what this means.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12340 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4003 \margrsxn774 \pard \sl-262 \tx59 \tx495 \tqr \tx7313 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4062 \posy8881 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3360 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f1 \i \b \pard \s6 \posx4062 \posy8881 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3360 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \li65 \ri3353 \sl-319 \tx65 \tqr \tx3996 40\_Column Versus 80\_Column\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \b \fs25 \lang1033 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s7 \posx4062 \posy8881 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3360 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri57 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 The Commodore 64\'97the predecessor of the Commodore 128\'97displays text of one size only. Forty characters (letters or numbers) just fit on one line of the screen: that is, there is one character in each of forty columns, so the letters are fairly large, and can be read even though they're a little fuzzy. This same way of displaying text is used when the Commodore 128 is used in C64 mode.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx4062 \posy8881 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3360 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li54 \fi435 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx54 \tx489 \tqr \tx7299 However, when you're typing a letter with a typewriter, you can usu\-ally get more than 40 characters on a line: closer to 80, in fact. This is also true of documents printed out on a computer's printer. Many people who use a computer for word processing, or for other business uses, want to see a line of text on the computer screen which corresponds more to\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx54 \tx489 \tqr \tx7299 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li3491 \ri53 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1281;}
{\s3 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7294 \qj \li3489 \fi440 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1282;}
{\s4 \tx78 \tqr \tx2547 \ql \sl304 \li3463 \ri4818 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1283;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 \qj \li3491 \ri56 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1284;}
{\s6 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7302 \qj \li3489 \fi440 \ri63 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1285;}
{\s7 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7300 \qj \li3489 \fi440 \ri65 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1286;}
{\s8 \tx509 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3032 \ri66 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1287;}
{\s9 \tx58 \tx498 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3483 \fi440 \ri68 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #1288;}
{\s10 \tx58 \tx498 \tqr \tx7315 \qj \li3483 \fi440 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #1289;}
}\par {\pard \posx2584 \posy1724 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2665 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx2584 \posy1724 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2665 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri53 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 what they will see when the letter is printed out. For this reason, most business computers use an 80\_column display mode, which fits 80 char\-acters on each line.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx2584 \posy1724 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2665 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li52 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7294 The Commodore 128 computer lets you choose between a 40\_column and an 80\_column display. This is done by depressing a key on the key\-board. However, if you select the 80\_column display, you'll need to use a monitor which will clearly display letters this small (half the size of the letters in the 40\_column display). A TV set cannot be used in 80\_column mode, and a composite monitor lacks sufficient resolution. To use this mode, you need a new kind of monitor called an RGBI monitor.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12569 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn2534 \margrsxn2234 \pard \sl-261 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7294 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f1 \i \pard \s4 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \li78 \ri4818 \sl-304 \tx78 \tqr \tx2547 The RGBI Monitor\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri56 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 More expensive than the direct or composite monitors, but with a sub\-stantially better picture, is an RGBI monitor. RGBI stands for Red\_Green\-Blue Intensity. In this type of monitor, signals containing information about these three colors and the intensity are sent on four separate wires from the computer to the monitor. This results in a very clear color picture, since the signals for the colors are not first mixed in the computer and then unmixed in the monitor, as they are in direct and composite monitors.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li52 \fi440 \ri63 \sl-260 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7302 Because an entirely different set of signals coming from the Com\-modore 128 is used for the RBGI monitor, a different connector on the back of the C128 is used for this kind of monitor than is used for a composite monitor or TV set. In fact, it's possible to have both kinds of monitors connected simultaneously, showing different pictures. (We'll show these connectors in the last section in this chapter.)\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li52 \fi440 \ri65 \sl-261 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7300 Many manufacturers make RGBI monitors. They vary widely in price: the better the picture you want, the more you must pay. The highest quality monitors sell for $750 or more, but good RGB monitors are available for around $400.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li509 \ri66 \sl-260 \tx509 \tqr \tx7299 Figure 2\_1 shows the connections for the various types of color displays.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li58 \fi440 \ri68 \sl-260 \tx58 \tx498 \tqr \tx7297 A potential problem to note with the Commodore 128 is that you can't use an RGB monitor in 40 column mode. This is unfortunate, since it means that to use all the modes on your C128 you really need two monitors: direct (or composite) and RGB. Fortunately, Commodore has solved this problem.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s10 \posx2591 \posy4702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7768 \absw7366 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li58 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx58 \tx498 \tqr \tx7315 At the same time it introduced the C128 computer, Commodore also announced a new monitor: the 1902, shown in Figure 2\_2. This monitor, which costs less than $300, actually combines several monitors in one. You can use it either as a composite monitor, or as an RGB monitor, switching from one to the other by means of a switch on the front panel.\par 
}\pard \sl-263 \tx58 \tx498 \tqr \tx7315 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1537;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx3016 \ql \sl312 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1538;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx7285 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1539;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx4870 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1540;}
}\par {\pard \posx3895 \posy1935 \phpg \pvpg \absh-572 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx3895 \posy1935 \phpg \pvpg \absh-572 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 Since it also accepts a composite signal, this monitor can also be used to display regular TV pictures, if you connect it to your VCR.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn5327 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3845 \margrsxn957 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3902 \posy2834 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw3067 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f1 \i \pard \s3 \posx3902 \posy2834 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw3067 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx3016 Monocl2rome Monitors\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx3016 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3898 \posy3235 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s4 \posx3898 \posy3235 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7285 If you plan to use your computer mostly for word processing, or for business programs such as spreadsheets and database programs, your best bet might be what is called a monochrome monitor. Like a black and white TV set, this monitor doesn't show a color picture; it is usually either black\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7285 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5129 \posy4912 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw4921 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s5 \posx5129 \posy4912 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw4921 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4870 Figure \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 2\_1. \fs25 \f2 \b Connections for Different Displays\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4870 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1793;}
{\s3 \tx57 \tx493 \tqr \tx7288 \qj \li3484 \fi436 \ri53 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1794;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx3038 \ql \sl363 \li3491 \ri4888 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1795;}
{\s5 \tx638 \tqr \tx7876 \qj \li2903 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1796;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tqr \tx3398 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1797;}
}\par {\pard \posx2816 \posy1826 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx2816 \posy1826 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 and amber or black and green. This monitor can be obtained for less than $200, and offers a much sharper picture than even an ROB monitor. If you're going to spend all day gazing at words or program listings on the screen, and you're not interested in full\_color games, this option has a lot to offer.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx2816 \posy1826 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li57 \fi436 \ri53 \sl-261 \tx57 \tx493 \tqr \tx7288 If you're going to use the 80\_column mode, make sure that the mono\-chrome monitor you choose has enough resolution to handle this degree of detail; not all of them do.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn7739 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn2178 \margrsxn2033 \pard \sl-261 \tx57 \tx493 \tqr \tx7288 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2228 \posy4223 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2608 \absw7927 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs34 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx2228 \posy4223 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2608 \absw7927 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri4888 \sl-363 \tx50 \tqr \tx3038 Program Cartridges\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx2228 \posy4223 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2608 \absw7927 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li638 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx638 \tqr \tx7876 Program cartridges aren't exactly peripherals in the sense a monitor or disk drive is. The cartridge slot (the connector where the cartridges plug in) is already built into the Commodore 128, so there is no major purchase to make to use this peripheral. The sole purpose of program cartridges is to provide a convenient way for software manufacturers to distribute their product. Only the manufacturer can put a program in the cartridge, so you can't use it to store programs of your own, as you can with a cassette or disk drive.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx638 \tqr \tx7876 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4812 \posy7324 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw3449 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s6 \posx4812 \posy7324 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw3449 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3398 Figure \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 2\_2. \fs25 \f2 \b 1902 Color Monitor\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3398 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx497 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li3491 \fi447 \ri68 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2049;}
{\s3 \tx53 \tx500 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li3488 \fi447 \ri66 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2050;}
{\s4 \tx59 \tx506 \tqr \tx7311 \qj \li3482 \fi447 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2051;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx2219 \ql \sl333 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2052;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7309 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2053;}
{\s7 \tx54 \tx495 \tqr \tx7298 \qj \li3487 \fi441 \ri61 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #2054;}
{\s8 \tx59 \tx500 \tqr \tx7296 \qj \li3482 \fi441 \ri63 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #2055;}
}\par {\pard \posx3917 \posy1906 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3967 \absw7362 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx3917 \posy1906 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3967 \absw7362 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi447 \ri68 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx497 \tqr \tx7293 The program cartridge itself is a plastic box about the size of a deck of cards. Some software manufacturers like it because it is almost indes\-tructible, and the program inside can't be conveniently copied. However, cartridges are more expensive to produce than disks, so other manufac\-turers avoid them.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx3917 \posy1906 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3967 \absw7362 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \fi447 \ri66 \sl-261 \tx53 \tx500 \tqr \tx7295 There is a considerable variety of commercially produced software available on program cartridges for the Commodore 64, which will also work on the Commodore 128 in the C64 mode. These programs are fairly inexpensive, ranging from around $19 to $40 for games, and up to $100 for more serious programs. It remains to be seen whether software devel\-opers will use this format for programs written specifically for the C128 mode.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx3917 \posy1906 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3967 \absw7362 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \fi447 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx59 \tx506 \tqr \tx7311 Something to remember about program cartridges is that you should turn off the power to the computer before plugging in the cartridge. If you don't do this, you run the risk of damaging the computer, or the cartridge.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12757 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3301 \margrsxn903 \pard \sl-261 \tx59 \tx506 \tqr \tx7311 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3351 \posy6182 \phpg \pvpg \absh-375 \absw2270 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx3351 \posy6182 \phpg \pvpg \absh-375 \absw2270 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-333 \tx50 \tqr \tx2219 Cassette Units\par 
}\pard \sl-333 \tx50 \tqr \tx2219 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3928 \posy6600 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6058 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx3928 \posy6600 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6058 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 When you turn off the power to your C128, everything you've stored in its internal RAM disappears. If you've written a long program and want to use it again without having to type it in again, this can be discouraging. You need some sort of permanent storage device, where programs and other data, such as letters you've written with a word\_processor program, can be stored more or less permanently. Such long\_term storage devices are sometimes called mass storage, since they can hold more data than can the memory in the computer. Program cartridges won't serve the purpose because, while they do store programs, you can't write your own programs on them; you can only read the manufacturer's program from them into your computer.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx3928 \posy6600 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6058 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li54 \fi441 \ri61 \sl-260 \tx54 \tx495 \tqr \tx7298 Cassettes offer the most inexpensive form of mass storage for your Commodore 128. A cassette unit is similar to the small cassette tape recorders used for playing music, and in fact it uses the same kind of cassette tapes. On many small computers it's possible to use any kind of cassette recorder, but the Commodore 128 uses a special kind of cassette recorder called a Datasette, made only by Commodore. (The Datasette records digital signals, rather than the analog signals used in other re\-corders. This makes it somewhat more reliable.) It is the most inexpensive way to store your programs and data, but it is also slow: you'll spend a long time waiting for a program to load.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx3928 \posy6600 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6058 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \fi441 \ri63 \sl-262 \tx59 \tx500 \tqr \tx7296 Most users who start with a cassette recorder eventually upgrade to a disk drive, so our advice is to start off with a disk drive if you can\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx59 \tx500 \tqr \tx7296 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx262 \ql \sl88 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2305;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx7286 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2306;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx1840 \ql \sl348 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2307;}
{\s5 \tx53 \tqr \tx7269 \qj \li3488 \ri80 \sl264 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2308;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li3491 \fi441 \ri71 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2309;}
{\s7 \tx58 \tx499 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li3483 \fi441 \ri58 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #2310;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3491 \fi441 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #2311;}
{\s9 \tx70 \tqr \tx2938 \ql \sl319 \li3471 \ri4418 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #2312;}
{\s10 \tx50 \tqr \tx7306 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #2313;}
}\par {\pard \posx8536 \posy1198 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw313 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx8536 \posy1198 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw313 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-88 \tx50 \tqr \tx262 \\\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12844 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1294 \margrsxn2904 \pard \sl-88 \tx50 \tqr \tx262 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1947 \posy1758 \phpg \pvpg \absh-833 \absw7337 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1947 \posy1758 \phpg \pvpg \absh-833 \absw7337 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7286 possibly afford it. Over 90 percent of Commodore 64 users chose a disk drive over the Datasette, and this figure will probably be similar for buyers of the Commodore 128.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7286 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1344 \posy2848 \phpg \pvpg \absh-420 \absw1891 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs31 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx1344 \posy2848 \phpg \pvpg \absh-420 \absw1891 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx1840 Disk Drives\par 
}\pard \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx1840 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1934 \posy3314 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6833 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx1934 \posy3314 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6833 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \ri80 \sl-264 \tx53 \tqr \tx7269 After a display device, a disk drive is probably the most popular peripheral for most personal computers.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx1934 \posy3314 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6833 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri71 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7278 Like cassettes, disk drives serve two principal purposes: they are a medium on which commercial software can be made available to your computer; and they also allow you to save, more or less permanently, programs or other data which you've created yourself However, they offer far better performance than a cassette drive. At somewhat less than $300, the disk drive represents a relatively serious investment, but it is so much faster and more reliable than a cassette unit that it is worth the price for most users.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx1934 \posy3314 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6833 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li58 \fi441 \ri58 \sl-260 \tx58 \tx499 \tqr \tx7291 It is possible to use old\_style Commodore drives, which were built for use with the Commodore 64, with the new Commodore 128. The most popular drive built by Commodore for the C64 was the 1541, a single drive unit (meaning it would hold only one disk at a time). Dual\_drive units are also available from other manufacturers. All of these units will also work on the Commodore 128. However, they do not take full advantage of one of the major improvements of the Commodore 128 over the Com\-modorq 64: the increased speed of the disk drives.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx1934 \posy3314 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6833 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7299 For the C128, Commodore has announced an entirely new line of disk drives. The single drive model is the 1571, shown in Figure 2\_3. This drive operates in three modes, corresponding to the three personalities of the Commodore 128 computer. In C64 mode, it's completely compatible with the old 1541 drive, and runs at the same speed as the old drive. In C128 mode, it runs five times faster; and in CP/M mode, it runs faster still \'97and is also compatible with most existing CP/M formats. The dual\-drive version of the drive is called the 1572.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7299 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1930 \posy10444 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2301 \absw7357 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs31 \f2 \i \pard \s9 \posx1930 \posy10444 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2301 \absw7357 \dxfrtext200 \li70 \ri4418 \sl-319 \tx70 \tqr \tx2938 Data liansfer Speed\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s10 \posx1930 \posy10444 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2301 \absw7357 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7306 What does this speed advantage of the new drive mean to you? The old 1541 drive ran at about 320 characters per second. If you had a five\_page letter or program listing of, say, 15,000 characters, it would take 46 seconds to transfer with the old drive (or with the new drive in C64 mode). In C128 mode, the new drive runs at 2000 characters per second, so the same document will take only 7.5 seconds to transfer. In CP/M mode, it's even faster: 3500 characters per second, for a 4.2\_second transfer. If you've ever\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7306 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2561;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx5845 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl265 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2562;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx1353 \ql \sl348 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2563;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7293 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2564;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx3082 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2565;}
}\par {\pard \posx3944 \posy1551 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1616 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx3944 \posy1551 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1616 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 sat waiting for a long program to load on your Commodore 64, you'll know that this increased speed is is not just a gimmick: it can really make your life easier. The longer the programs you write or use, and the more you operate your computer, the more you'll appreciate the increased speed of these drives. The new 1571 drive also stores twice as much information on a disk: 340K bytes, versus only 170K for the older 1541 drive.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn7150 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3334 \margrsxn887 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4700 \posy3376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-577 \absw5896 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \i \pard \s3 \posx4700 \posy3376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-577 \absw5896 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-265 \tx50 \tqr \tx5845 The new 1571 intelligent disk drive can transfer data up to ten tines faster than the older 1541 disk drive.\par 
}\pard \sl-265 \tx50 \tqr \tx5845 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3384 \posy4227 \phpg \pvpg \absh-420 \absw1404 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs31 \f2 \plain \fs31 \f2 \lang1033 \pard \s4 \posx3384 \posy4227 \phpg \pvpg \absh-420 \absw1404 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx1353 Printers\par 
}\pard \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx1353 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3960 \posy4694 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1090 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx3960 \posy4694 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1090 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 You can have a lot of fun playing games and writing programs on the Commodore 128 without ever printing anything out. However, if you want to use your C128 for word processing, or for other serious business pro\-grams like spreadsheets, or if you want to write really long BASIC pro\-\pard \posx3960 \posy4694 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1090 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 \par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx6117 \posy6739 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3133 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f3 \b \pard \s6 \posx6117 \posy6739 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3133 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3082 Figure 2\_3. 1571 Disk Drive\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3082 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx51 \tqr \tx7284 \qj \li3490 \ri82 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2817;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7281 \qj \li3491 \fi440 \ri85 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2818;}
{\s4 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7316 \qj \li3489 \fi440 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2819;}
{\s5 \tx56 \tx496 \tqr \tx7316 \qj \li3485 \fi440 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2820;}
{\s6 \tx61 \tx501 \tqr \tx7305 \qj \li3480 \fi440 \ri61 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2821;}
{\s7 \tx66 \tx506 \tqr \tx7301 \qj \li3475 \fi440 \ri65 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #2822;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tqr \tx1429 \ql \sl363 \li3491 \ri6518 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #2823;}
{\s9 \tx654 \tqr \tx7897 \ql \li2887 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #2824;}
}\par {\pard \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \ri82 \sl-263 \tx51 \tqr \tx7284 grams, then you'll need a printer so you can save the results of your work on paper.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi440 \ri85 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7281 The kind of printer you need depends on how fast you want your output printed, how good you want it to look, and how much money you want to spend.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li52 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx52 \tx492 \tqr \tx7316 The least expensive kind of printer is called a dot\_matrix printer. This kind of printer is fast, but the printed characters have that made\_of\-dots computer look to them. If you intend to write serious business letters on your computer, you will probably want what's called a letter quality printer. These printers are more expensive, and use some form of type\-writer\_like mechanism to form the letters, so the printing is much cleaner. However, these printers are usually slower than dot\_matrix printers.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx56 \tx496 \tqr \tx7316 Commodore did not announce any new printers specifically for the Commodore 128, but they manufacture a variety of dot\_matrix printers which work very well for the Commodore 64 and which are also perfect for the C128. These are the MPS\_801, the MPS\_802, and the MPS\_803. The 801 and the 803 are the least expensive. The 802 is a heavier\_duty machine suitable for business. All these printers can print not only text, but graphics (pictures). Being able to print graphics is useful if you are interested in computer art, or if you need to generate graphs and charts.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li61 \fi440 \ri61 \sl-260 \tx61 \tx501 \tqr \tx7305 Other manufacturers also make printers that can be used with the Commodore 128. Notice however, that if a printer has not been built specifically to work with the Commodore, you'll need an adaptor (a small box or a special plug) to make the printer work with the computer. MSD Systems and CardCo are two companies making the adaptors, which are priced between $50 and $150 (addresses are shown in the back of the book). Even with the adaptor, not all printers will print graphics, so be sure to check that the printer does what you expect before you take it home.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx2422 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-8661 \absw7367 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li66 \fi440 \ri65 \sl-262 \tx66 \tx506 \tqr \tx7301 For serious business use you'll probably want a letter quality printer, such as the Commodore DPS\_1101. This produces copy like that typed on a good\_quality office typewriter; but it's somewhat slower than the dot\-matrix printers.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12166 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1801 \margrsxn2392 \pard \sl-262 \tx66 \tx506 \tqr \tx7301 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1851 \posy10501 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1566 \absw7948 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f1 \pard \s8 \posx1851 \posy10501 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1566 \absw7948 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri6518 \sl-363 \tx50 \tqr \tx1429 Modems\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx1851 \posy10501 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1566 \absw7948 \dxfrtext200 \li654 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx654 \tqr \tx7897 One of the fastest\_growing uses of personal computers is the field of telecommunications. This means using your computer to send and receive data over the telephone lines. Why would you want to do that? You might want to send a program to a friend in another city. Or you might be\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx654 \tqr \tx7897 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx57 \tqr \tx7298 \qj \li3484 \ri64 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #3073;}
{\s3 \tx60 \tx501 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3481 \fi441 \ri65 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #3074;}
{\s4 \tx62 \tx503 \tqr \tx7301 \qj \li3479 \fi441 \ri61 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #3075;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7312 \qj \li3491 \fi441 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #3076;}
{\s6 \tx63 \tx504 \tqr \tx7302 \qj \li3478 \fi441 \ri60 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #3077;}
{\s7 \tx51 \tx492 \tqr \tx7309 \qj \li3490 \fi441 \ri53 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #3078;}
}\par {\pard \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li57 \ri64 \sl-260 \tx57 \tqr \tx7298 interested in accessing one of the on\_line database services, such as CompuServe or The Source. These services give you instant access to the latest stock prices, weather reports, movie reviews, and other data. They also let you communicate with groups of people who share a common interest, such as stamp collecting or electronic music. These groups are called SIGs, for special interest groups. There is, for example, a SIG for Commodore computers on CompuServe. These groups offer free programs, free advice, and a forum for discussion.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi441 \ri65 \sl-261 \tx60 \tx501 \tqr \tx7297 The most important variance between different kinds of modems is that of speed: how fast can the modem send or receive a certain amount of information? A slow modem can take a long time to transmit even a small amount of information; so if you plan to use a modem extensively, a fast one is a good investment.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li62 \fi441 \ri61 \sl-261 \tx62 \tx503 \tqr \tx7301 The slowest modems used today are rated at 300 baud. What does baud mean? Very roughly, the baud rate is the number of characters per second the modem can send, divided by 10. Thus, a 300 baud modem can send about 30 characters per second. (This definition isn't exactly right, but it's close enough to give you an idea how fast modems work.)\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7312 Commodore sells a variety of modems: the \fs22 \f1 1600 \fs25 \f0 and the \fs22 \f1 1650, \fs25 \f0 which have been around for some time, and the newer \fs22 \f1 1660 \fs25 \f0 and \fs22 \f1 1670, \fs25 \f0 which were introduced with the C128 computer. The first three are 300 baud modems, while the \fs22 \f1 1670, \fs25 \f0 shown in Figure 2\_4, runs at a brisk 1200 baud. While the 300 baud modems range in price from $40 to about $100, the \fs22 \f1 1670 will \fs25 \f0 set you back about $200.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li63 \fi441 \ri60 \sl-261 \tx63 \tx504 \tqr \tx7302 In addition to Commodore, there are a wide variety of other modem manufacturers, including Hayes, Human Engineered Software, and An\-chor Automation. Some of these modems are designed to plug directly into the C128, but others will require an adaptor called an RS\_232 inter\-face module, which costs about \fs22 \f1 $50 \fs25 \f0 and can be obtained from several manufacturers, including Commodore and MSD Systems.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx4075 \posy1589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-10486 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \fi441 \ri53 \sl-260 \tx51 \tx492 \tqr \tx7309 Besides speed, modems are also distinguished by features such as: Will the modem automatically answer the telephone? Will it automatically dial the phone to make an outgoing call? In the Commodore line, all but the \fs22 \f1 1600 \fs25 \f0 have these autoanswer autodial features. However, the \fs22 \f1 1650 \fs25 \f0 and \fs22 \f1 1660 \fs25 \f0 require special software to use these features. For instance, if you want to dial a number, it is the software that generates the clicks for each digit you dial. In the \fs22 \f1 1670 \fs25 \f0 on the other hand, the modem itself generates the clicks; all the software needs to tell it is what number to dial. The \fs22 \f1 1670 is \fs25 \f0 thus a "smart" modem, which makes it compatible with a wider variety of communications software.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12174 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4025 \margrsxn753 \pard \sl-260 \tx51 \tx492 \tqr \tx7309 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx5898 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #3329;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx1491 \ql \sl369 \li3491 \ri6446 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #3330;}
{\s4 \tx650 \tqr \tx7887 \ql \li2891 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #3331;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx2748 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #3332;}
}\par {\pard \posx3153 \posy1702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw5949 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \i \pard \s2 \posx3153 \posy1702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw5949 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx5898 A modem should be one of the first peripherals you own. With it, you can shop from home, access the latest stock prices, weather reports, movie reviews, electronic bul\-letin boards, and perhaps best of all, obtain free programs.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn6700 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1809 \margrsxn2394 \pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx5898 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1859 \posy3050 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1846 \absw7938 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f1 \plain \fs32 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s3 \posx1859 \posy3050 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1846 \absw7938 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri6446 \sl-369 \tx50 \tqr \tx1491 Joysticks\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \pard \s4 \posx1859 \posy3050 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1846 \absw7938 \dxfrtext200 \li650 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx650 \tqr \tx7887 For games and various other programs you'll probably want to buy one or more joysticks or similar devices. Joysticks are small handheld levers that let you input up\_down left\_right directional information directly into the computer. Most joysticks also include a button, which is used to fire guns or lasers in computer games.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx650 \tqr \tx7887 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4762 \posy6285 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw2799 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f3 \b \pard \s5 \posx4762 \posy6285 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw2799 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2748 Figure \fs25 \f2 \plain \fs25 \f2 \lang1033 2~4. 1670 \fs25 \f3 \b Modem\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2748 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx494 \tqr \tx7307 \qj \li3491 \fi444 \ri52 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #3585;}
{\s3 \tx54 \tx498 \tqr \tx7309 \qj \li3487 \fi444 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #3586;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx3762 \ql \sl355 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #3587;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7288 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #3588;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx4310 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl318 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #3589;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx7294 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #3590;}
{\s8 \tx56 \tx494 \tqr \tx7275 \qj \li3485 \fi438 \ri69 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #3591;}
}\par {\pard \posx4234 \posy1702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3445 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx4234 \posy1702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3445 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi444 \ri52 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx494 \tqr \tx7307 Besides joysticks, there is a variety of other devices that act more or less like joysticks, including trackballs, mice, touch tablets, and paddles. Some users prefer one or the other of these devices, and some games or programs are designed to work with a particular device. However, the joystick is the most popular of such devices, and is a good start for anyone interested in games.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4234 \posy1702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3445 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li54 \fi444 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx54 \tx498 \tqr \tx7309 Note that not all such devices can be used with any given program. Joysticks and trackballs are mostly compatible with each other, in that they both transmit information about direction to the computer: is the stick pointed north, northeast, east, or where? Touch tablets, mice, and game paddles, on the other hand, send a position to the computer. They often work in conjunction with a pointer on the computer screen, which is positioned at a particular place.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn11565 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3634 \margrsxn596 \pard \sl-260 \tx54 \tx498 \tqr \tx7309 {\pard \posx3684 \posy5405 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw3813 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs33 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx3684 \posy5405 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw3813 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx3762 Other Peripheral Devices\par 
}\pard \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx3762 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4244 \posy5876 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2399 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx4244 \posy5876 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2399 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7288 The variety of peripheral devices made for the Commodore 64 and the Commodore 128 is truly staggering. There are speech synthesis and rec\-ognition devices, as well as peripherals to open your garage door, check your house for burglars and fire, and operate your model trains. With the proper equipment you can get your C128 to draw engineering drawings, respond to your touching its screen, or synthesize music from a piano\-like keyboard. We won't describe these esoteric devices here. What we've said about the more common peripherals should be enough to begin think\-ing about what you'll need for your Commodore 128.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7288 {\pard \posx3687 \posy8533 \phpg \pvpg \absh-760 \absw4361 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs33 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx3687 \posy8533 \phpg \pvpg \absh-760 \absw4361 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-318 \tx50 \tqr \tx4310 Connecting Peripherals to the Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \sl-318 \tx50 \tqr \tx4310 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4250 \posy9327 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2139 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx4250 \posy9327 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2139 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7294 Any peripheral device you buy is connected to the Commodore 128 by plugging it into one of the openings on the side or the back of the C128. There are quite a number of these connection ports, in a wide variety of shapes and sizes. It's easy to get confused and try to connect things in the wrong place, so this section will describe these connectors, and ex\-plain which peripheral gets plugged into which connector.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx4250 \posy9327 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2139 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi438 \ri69 \sl-261 \tx56 \tx494 \tqr \tx7275 The first group of connectors we'll talk about is located on the right side of the Commodore 128, as shown in Figure 2\_5.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx56 \tx494 \tqr \tx7275 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx1427 \qc \sl253 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #3841;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tqr \tx6574 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #3842;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx2308 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl304 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #3843;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #3844;}
{\s6 \tx488 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li3491 \fi438 \ri51 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #3845;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx266 \ql \sl132 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #3846;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx4797 \ql \sl253 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #3847;}
}\par {\pard \posx4777 \posy1845 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw1478 \dxfrtext200 \fs24 \f0 \b \pard \s2 \posx4777 \posy1845 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw1478 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx1427 Be Careful\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn9791 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1747 \margrsxn2989 \pard \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx1427 {\pard \posx2159 \posy2238 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2134 \absw6625 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f1 \plain \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s3 \posx2159 \posy2238 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2134 \absw6625 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx6574 Connecting peripherals to the Commodore 128 is as simple as connecting the components of a stereo system\'97usually, there is only one way a connector can be plugged in. Because some of the Commodore 128 connectors contain voltages from inside the com\-puter, it is a good practice to turn off power before plugging or unplugging peripherals. Never plug or unplug ROM cartridges or peripherals connected to the user port without first turning off the power.\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx6574 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1802 \posy5069 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw2359 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f2 \i \pard \s4 \posx1802 \posy5069 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw2359 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx2308 Power and Reset\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx2308 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1797 \posy5481 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2664 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f1 \plain \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx1797 \posy5481 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2664 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 On the right side of the Commodore 128, closest to the back, is the power connector. One cord from the power supply plugs in here. The power supply is a small box, about 6 inches long, which converts house current to the lower voltage used by the C128. Next to the power connector is the on/op switch.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx1797 \posy5481 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2664 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi438 \ri51 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7292 Notice that although this switch turns off the power to the computer, the power supply itself keeps going. You might want to unplug the power supply from the wall outlet if you're not going to use the computer for a while. This will make the power supply last longer. You can also buy a "power strip," a row of outlets with its own switch which plugs into the\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7292 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx8885 \posy8861 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw317 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f1 \pard \s7 \posx8885 \posy8861 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw317 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-132 \tx50 \tqr \tx266 i\par 
}\pard \sl-132 \tx50 \tqr \tx266 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3081 \posy9377 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw4848 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \b \pard \s8 \posx3081 \posy9377 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw4848 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx4797 Figure 2\_5. Right Side of the Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx4797 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx67 \tqr \tx7290 \qj \li3474 \ri54 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #4097;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tx489 \tqr \tx7294 \qj \li3491 \fi439 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #4098;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx2762 \ql \sl319 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #4099;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7305 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #4100;}
{\s6 \tx68 \tx501 \tqr \tx7275 \qj \li3473 \fi433 \ri80 \sl264 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #4101;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx3615 \ql \sl319 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #4102;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #4103;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx4807 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #4104;}
}\par {\pard \posx4247 \posy1636 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2925 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx4247 \posy1636 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2925 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li67 \ri54 \sl-262 \tx67 \tqr \tx7290 wall. This is useful because you can plug your computer and all your peripherals into it, and turn them all off at once with the switch on the power strip.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4247 \posy1636 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2925 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi439 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx489 \tqr \tx7294 Next to the on/off switch is the reset button. This is used to restart your machine without turning it on and then off again. You may need to restart it if a program gets "hung up," and the computer will not respond to keyboard commands. Also, some types of copy\_protected software require you to reset the computer before they will load. You can do this by turning the computer off and then on again, but that's hard on the electrical components inside the computer, so it's better to use the reset switch.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn9818 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4197 \margrsxn581 \pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tx489 \tqr \tx7294 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4282 \posy4868 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2813 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f1 \i \pard \s4 \posx4282 \posy4868 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2813 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2762 The Controller Ports\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2762 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4254 \posy5293 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx4254 \posy5293 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7305 The controller ports are for joysticks and similar devices. Attaching such devices is fairly straightforward: you simply plug them in. Be careful, however, if you're only using one joystick, to plug it into the correct port. Software written by Commodore generally requires you to plug your joys\-tick into port number 1, while that written by other developers often requires you to use port number 2.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx4254 \posy5293 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7356 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li68 \fi433 \ri80 \sl-264 \tx68 \tx501 \tqr \tx7275 The rest of the connections are found on the rear of the C128, shown in Figure 2\_6.\par 
}\pard \sl-264 \tx68 \tx501 \tqr \tx7275 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4288 \posy7731 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw3666 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f1 \i \pard \s7 \posx4288 \posy7731 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw3666 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx3615 The Serial Bus Connection\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx3615 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4253 \posy8161 \phpg \pvpg \absh-572 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx4253 \posy8161 \phpg \pvpg \absh-572 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 This connection is used for several different kinds of peripherals, most commonly disk drives and printers. Technically, the word serial means\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5551 \posy9407 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4858 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s9 \posx5551 \posy9407 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4858 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4807 Figure 2\_6. Rear View of the Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4807 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #4353;}
{\s3 \tx55 \tx497 \tqr \tx7290 \qj \li3486 \fi442 \ri53 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #4354;}
{\s4 \tx64 \tqr \tx1877 \ql \sl261 \li3477 \ri5481 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #4355;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx7308 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #4356;}
{\s6 \tx56 \tx492 \tqr \tx7289 \qj \li3485 \fi436 \ri69 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #4357;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx5868 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #4358;}
{\s8 \tx67 \tqr \tx2601 \ql \sl261 \li3474 \ri4745 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #4359;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tqr \tx7296 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #4360;}
}\par {\pard \posx2074 \posy1680 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2921 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx2074 \posy1680 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2921 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 that each character or byte of information is sent in separate bits, one after the other. Since each byte is composed of eight bits, this way of sending information is theoretically eight times slower than sending each byte all at once, as is done in a parallel connection. However, sending all eight bits at once requires eight separate connectors, so the serial tech\-nique is less expensive.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx2074 \posy1680 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2921 \absw7344 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li55 \fi442 \ri53 \sl-261 \tx55 \tx497 \tqr \tx7290 The word bus refers to a kind of data path used in the computer. The bus is really more like a highway than a bus. Data is sent down the bus to a variety of different destinations. Like cities lying along a highway, peripherals can occupy different positions along the bus. Let's look at this arrangement in more detail.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12251 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn2024 \margrsxn2750 \pard \sl-261 \tx55 \tx497 \tqr \tx7290 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2082 \posy4805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3300 \absw7359 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \b \pard \s4 \posx2082 \posy4805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3300 \absw7359 \dxfrtext200 \li64 \ri5481 \sl-261 \tx64 \tqr \tx1877 Daisy\_Chaining\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx2082 \posy4805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3300 \absw7359 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7308 An unusual feature of the serial bus connector is that more than one peripheral can be plugged into it. How is this possible? Through a tech\-nique called daisy\_chaining. This means that the first peripheral is plugged directly into the serial bus connector on the back of the computer. Then the second peripheral is plugged, not into the computer, but into the first peripheral. The third peripheral is plugged into the second, and so on. There can be as many as five different peripherals connected to the Com\-modore's serial bus connector. This process is shown in Figure 2\_7.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx2082 \posy4805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3300 \absw7359 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi436 \ri69 \sl-259 \tx56 \tx492 \tqr \tx7289 A question that might occur to you is, if all these peripherals are on one cable, how does the computer know which peripheral it's talking to when it sends a message out this connector?\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx56 \tx492 \tqr \tx7289 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2812 \posy8307 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1117 \absw5919 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \i \b \pard \s7 \posx2812 \posy8307 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1117 \absw5919 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx5868 Because the Commodore 128 uses intelligentperipherals that can communicate over a daisy\_chained serial bus, connections are simpler than on other computers, and expanding the system is also easier.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx5868 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2085 \posy9622 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2530 \absw7347 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx2085 \posy9622 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2530 \absw7347 \dxfrtext200 \li67 \ri4745 \sl-261 \tx67 \tqr \tx2601 Intelligent Peripherals\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s9 \posx2085 \posy9622 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2530 \absw7347 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7296 To understand how the serial bus connector works, you should know that the Commodore 128 can make use of a special kind of peripheral device called an intelligent peripheral. In this regard the Commodore is unusual in the computer world. Most computer systems can only use what can be called "dumb" peripherals. The computer tells them exactly what to do, and they report back every little thing that's going on inside them, and can make no decisions without the computer's help. The C64 and C128, on the other hand, can use peripherals that perform complex tasks all by\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7296 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx64 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3477 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #4609;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tx486 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3491 \fi436 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #4610;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx4138 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #4611;}
}\par {\pard \posx4106 \posy1693 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3705 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx4106 \posy1693 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3705 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li64 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx64 \tqr \tx7297 themselves. The disk drive, for instance, can format a disk, keep track of what programs are on a disk, and read and write programs from the disk, without any help from the computer itself.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4106 \posy1693 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3705 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi436 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx486 \tqr \tx7297 This intelligence also permits the computer to communicate with a particular peripheral, even though there are several peripherals connected to the single serial bus connector. Every time the computer sends a message to a peripheral, such as a request to the disk drive to send a file, it sends something called a device number along with the message. Each peripheral has its own device number, and when it sees the message going down the cable, it checks to see if the number on the message is addressed to it. If the disk drive is device #8, for example, and the message is for device #4 \'97the printer\'97the disk drive will ignore it; but the printer will accept the message and do what the message says, probably to print out a partic\-ular file.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn6352 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4056 \margrsxn737 \pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tx486 \tqr \tx7297 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5732 \posy5937 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw4189 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \b \pard \s4 \posx5732 \posy5937 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw4189 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4138 Figure \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 2\_7. \fs25 \f1 \b Daisy\_chained Peripherals\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4138 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7288 \qj \li3491 \fi438 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #4865;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tqr \tx3047 \ql \sl268 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #4866;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx7304 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #4867;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx2135 \ql \sl348 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #4868;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3491 \ri57 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #4869;}
{\s7 \tx54 \tx487 \tqr \tx7306 \qj \li3487 \fi433 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #4870;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tqr \tx3752 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl328 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #4871;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #4872;}
}\par {\pard \posx2300 \posy1592 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1101 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx2300 \posy1592 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1101 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi438 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7288 Now you know why only certain peripherals, those built especially for the Commodore system, will work on the C128. They must be intelli\-gent peripherals, capable of interpreting the special messages sent from the computer.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12335 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1668 \margrsxn2528 \pard \sl-263 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7288 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2312 \posy2900 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3098 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx2312 \posy2900 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3098 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-268 \tx50 \tqr \tx3047 Networks and File Servers\par 
}\pard \sl-268 \tx50 \tqr \tx3047 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2298 \posy3276 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx2298 \posy3276 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7304 Another use for the serial bus connector is to connect a number of C128s or C64s together so that they can all share certain peripherals\'97commonly a disk drive and printer. This is a popular system in schools, where it's more economical to give each student only the keyboard unit, and buy a disk drive and printer that will serve an entire class. In such a system, each computer is connected\'97via the serial bus\'97to a box called arfile server. The file server is, in turn, connected to the printer and disk drive.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7304 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1718 \posy5420 \phpg \pvpg \absh-420 \absw2186 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f2 \pard \s5 \posx1718 \posy5420 \phpg \pvpg \absh-420 \absw2186 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx2135 The User Port\par 
}\pard \sl-348 \tx50 \tqr \tx2135 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2306 \posy5884 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3965 \absw7357 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx2306 \posy5884 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3965 \absw7357 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri57 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 The user port is a connection on the right\_hand side on the rear of the Commodore 128. It is most commonly used for modems, but it is also used for a variety of more esoteric peripherals, such as voice synthesizers, model train controllers, and so forth. It is, in many ways, like the RS\_232 port which is standard on many other computers\'97but there are differ\-ences\'97so that standard RS\_232 equipment, such as modems, will not work. Modems and other equipment which use this port must be specially modified to work with Commodore equipment. This port is the same on the C128 as it is on the old C64, however, so that any equipment that is attached to the user port on the C64 will work on the C128.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx2306 \posy5884 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3965 \absw7357 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li54 \fi433 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx54 \tx487 \tqr \tx7306 To attach a Commodore modem to this port no cable is needed: you simply push the modem right into the port. Of course, you must then connect the modem to the telephone, following the instructions for the particular modem. It is possible to use standard RS\_232 equipment with this port, but you'll need a special adaptor to make it work with the C128.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx54 \tx487 \tqr \tx7306 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2339 \posy10151 \phpg \pvpg \absh-700 \absw3803 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f3 \i \pard \s8 \posx2339 \posy10151 \phpg \pvpg \absh-700 \absw3803 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-328 \tx50 \tqr \tx3752 The TV Output and Channel Selector Switch\par 
}\pard \sl-328 \tx50 \tqr \tx3752 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2312 \posy10875 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1361 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s9 \posx2312 \posy10875 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1361 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 This small round outlet is where you plug in the cable if you're using a standard TV set. The cable actually connects the computer to the switch\-box, which is, in turn, connected to the TV. The channel selector switch is set to channel 3 or 4, whichever channel is not used (or is weakest) in your area.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx4979 \ql \sl304 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #5121;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #5122;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx3459 \ql \li3491 \ri50 \sl320 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #5123;}
{\s5 \tx197 \tqr \tx4889 \ql \li3491 \fi147 \ri50 \sl256 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #5124;}
{\s6 \tx77 \tqr \tx5818 \ql \sl304 \li3464 \ri1527 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #5125;}
{\s7 \tx51 \tqr \tx7286 \qj \li3490 \ri59 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #5126;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li3491 \fi441 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #5127;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tqr \tx2456 \ql \sl304 \li3491 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #5128;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx7285 \qj \li3491 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #5129;}
}\par {\pard \posx4157 \posy1650 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw5030 \dxfrtext200 \fs29 \f0 \i \pard \s2 \posx4157 \posy1650 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw5030 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx4979 Composite or Direct Video Connector\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12376 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4078 \margrsxn709 \pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx4979 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4128 \posy2056 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s3 \posx4128 \posy2056 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7295 This connector is the leftmost of the two large round connectors on the rear of the C128.This kind of connector is called a DIN connector. The cable coming out of it separates into several RCA\_type jacks (the kind you use to connect your hi\_fi equipment together). If you're using the direct color monitor, these jacks go to three separate connections on the back of the monitor, labeled chrome, luma, and audio. If you're using the com\-posite monitor, there are only two jacks to connect to the monitor: the video signal and the audio signal.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7295 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4145 \posy4515 \phpg \pvpg \absh-982 \absw3510 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f0 \i \pard \s4 \posx4145 \posy4515 \phpg \pvpg \absh-982 \absw3510 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-320 \tx50 \tqr \tx3459 The ROB Video Connector \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 This is the small oblong an ROB monitor, using f\par 
}\pard \sl-320 \tx50 \tqr \tx3459 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx6501 \posy4923 \phpg \pvpg \absh-568 \absw4940 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx6501 \posy4923 \phpg \pvpg \absh-568 \absw4940 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \fi147 \ri50 \sl-256 \tx50 \tx197 \tqr \tx4889 D\_connector. It connects directly to the back of Lour different jacks: red, green, blue, and audio.\par 
}\pard \sl-256 \tx50 \tx197 \tqr \tx4889 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4135 \posy5814 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4899 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f0 \i \pard \s6 \posx4135 \posy5814 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4899 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \li77 \ri1527 \sl-304 \tx77 \tqr \tx5818 The Expansion (or Program Cartridge) Slot\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s7 \posx4135 \posy5814 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4899 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \ri59 \sl-261 \tx51 \tqr \tx7286 This is a simple connector to use, but its effect on the computer is rather complicated. The most common use of this slot is for plugging in program cartridges. This is easily done: you turn the computer off, plug in the cartridge, turn the computer on again, and the game or whatever program is in the cartridge takes control of the computer. Besides games, you can also use this slot to change your computer from one which speaks BASIC into one which speaks other computer languages, such as FORTH.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s8 \posx4135 \posy5814 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4899 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7295 If you know something about how computers work, you'll be interested to know that almost every interior signal in the Commodore 64 and Com\-modore 128 computers is made available on this connector, including the data bus and the address bus. Thus, whatever is plugged into the slot can completely take over the operation of the computer, changing it into a machine with different characteristics. It's even possible to plug in a different microprocessor chip here, so that the computer assumes an entirely different personality. The C64 uses this capability to turn itself into a CP/M computer with the aid of an optional cartridge; on the C128 this capability is built into the computer.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7295 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4166 \posy11031 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw2507 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f0 \i \pard \s9 \posx4166 \posy11031 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw2507 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx2456 The Cassette Port\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx2456 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4146 \posy11441 \phpg \pvpg \absh-836 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s10 \posx4146 \posy11441 \phpg \pvpg \absh-836 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7285 The type of connector used for the cassette port is called a Molex. A cable from the Commodore Datasette recorder or another recorder specially designed to work with the Commodore 128 plugs in here.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7285 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7287 \ql \li3491 \fi441 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #5377;}
}\par {\pard \posx1972 \posy1595 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1359 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1972 \posy1595 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1359 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7287 Now that you know what peripherals are available for the C128 and how to hook them up, you're ready to find out more about the three modes of the Commodore 128 Personal Computer: the C128 mode, the C64 mode, and the CP/M mode. In our discussion of each of these modes we'll have more to say about which peripherals are suitable for which mode.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \marglsxn1922 \margrsxn2881 \pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7287 \fs24 \f0 }