{\rtf1\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Times New Roman;}
{\f1\froman Times New Roman;}{\f2\froman Times New Roman;}{\f3\froman Times New Roman;}{\f4\fmodern MS LineDraw;}{\f5\fdecor Symbol;}
}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\paperh12240 \paperw20160 \margl10646 \margr1506 \margt297 \margb858 \plain \lang1033 \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx1164 \tqr \tx3812 \ql \sl666 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx3141 \ql \li10596 \ri50 \sl283 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2;}
{\s4 \tx485 \tqr \tx5521 \ql \li10161 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #3;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx6114 \ql \li10161 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #4;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx5421 \ql \li10161 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl265 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #5;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx5676 \ql \li10161 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #6;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7290 \qj \li10586 \ri51 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #7;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tx482 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li10596 \fi432 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #8;}
{\s10 \tx50 \tqr \tx5314 \ql \li10596 \ri2594 \sl318 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #9;}
{\s11 \tx644 \tqr \tx7858 \ql \li10002 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #10;}
}{\pard \posx10710 \posy671 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1295 \absw3863 \dxfrtext200 \fs48 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx10710 \posy671 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1295 \absw3863 \dxfrtext200 \li1164 \ri50 \sl-666 \tx50 \tx1164 \tqr \tx3812 7\par 
\pard \s2 \posx10710 \posy671 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1295 \absw3863 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-666 \tx50 \tx1164 \tqr \tx3812 Sound and Music\par 
}\linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \pard \sl-666 \tx50 \tx1164 \tqr \tx3812 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11723 \posy2540 \phpg \pvpg \absh-340 \absw3192 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx11723 \posy2540 \phpg \pvpg \absh-340 \absw3192 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx3141 In this chapter you'll learn:\par 
}\pard \sl-283 \tx50 \tqr \tx3141 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11739 \posy2972 \phpg \pvpg \absh-600 \absw5572 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx11739 \posy2972 \phpg \pvpg \absh-600 \absw5572 \dxfrtext200 \li485 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx5521 \'b7 What kinds of sounds the Commodore 128 can produce\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx5521 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11735 \posy3665 \phpg \pvpg \absh-600 \absw6165 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx11735 \posy3665 \phpg \pvpg \absh-600 \absw6165 \dxfrtext200 \li485 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx6114 \'b7 The software and hardware available for generating music\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx6114 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11732 \posy4363 \phpg \pvpg \absh-605 \absw5472 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx11732 \posy4363 \phpg \pvpg \absh-605 \absw5472 \dxfrtext200 \li485 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl-265 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx5421 \'b7 The principles behind Commodore 128 sound generation\par 
}\pard \sl-265 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx5421 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11733 \posy5061 \phpg \pvpg \absh-600 \absw5727 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s7 \posx11733 \posy5061 \phpg \pvpg \absh-600 \absw5727 \dxfrtext200 \li485 \fi-435 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx5676 \'b7 How to use the new BASIC 7.0 sound\_producing commands\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx5676 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11263 \posy6443 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3190 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \pard \s8 \posx11263 \posy6443 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3190 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \ri51 \sl-261 \tx60 \tqr \tx7290 The sound chip built into the Commodore 128 is probably the most sophisticated sound\_producing device on any personal computer, regard\-less of price. Originally designed to generate the professional\_quality sounds of video games, the sound chip is capable of truly amazing per\-formance and versatility. It can reproduce the sound of almost any musical instrument, and an almost infinite variety of sound effects, including the human voice.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \pard \s9 \posx11263 \posy6443 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3190 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi432 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tx482 \tqr \tx7291 In this chapter we'll first introduce you to the general sound capabil\-ities of the Commodore 128, and explore some of the existing software for music generation. Then we'll discuss in some detail how the Commodore 128 produces sound, and finally we'll show you how to achieve sound effects and music using BASIC 7.0.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tx482 \tqr \tx7291 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx10696 \posy9805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1349 \absw7909 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs33 \f3 \pard \s10 \posx10696 \posy9805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1349 \absw7909 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri2594 \sl-318 \tx50 \tqr \tx5314 What Can You Do with Sound on the Commodore 128?\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \pard \s11 \posx10696 \posy9805 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1349 \absw7909 \dxfrtext200 \li644 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx644 \tqr \tx7858 The easiest way to take advantage of the Commodore 128's sound capa\-bility is to purchase commercial software. Mostly oriented toward music,\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx644 \tqr \tx7858 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx64 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10582 \ri61 \sl252 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #257;}
{\s3 \tx65 \tx510 \tqr \tx7289 \qj \li10581 \fi445 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #258;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tx495 \tqr \tx7286 \qj \li10596 \fi445 \ri53 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #259;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx2957 \ql \sl312 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #260;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #261;}
{\s7 \tx53 \tx494 \tqr \tx7279 \qj \li10593 \fi441 \ri68 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #262;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tqr \tx503 \ql \sl175 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #263;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx7283 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl257 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #264;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx3985 \ql \li10596 \ri50 \sl303 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #265;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx7273 \qj \li10596 \ri65 \sl267 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #266;}
{\s12 \tx56 \tx497 \tqr \tx7277 \qj \li10590 \fi441 \ri61 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #267;}
{\s13 \tx63 \tx504 \tqr \tx7288 \qj \li10583 \fi441 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #268;}
{\s14 \tx50 \tqr \tx5381 \ql \li10596 \ri50 \sl323 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #269;}
{\s15 \tqr \tx7277 \qj \li10596 \ri55 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #270;}
{\s16 \tx71 \tx507 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li10575 \fi436 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #271;}
}\par {\pard \posx1505 \posy310 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5757 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1505 \posy310 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5757 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li64 \ri61 \sl-252 \tx64 \tqr \tx7278 this software will typically let you turn your C128 into a sophisticated music synthesizer, rivaling professional machines costing thousands of dollars. Many musicians, composers, and rock groups are already using the Commodore 64 as a synthesizer, and the C128 has all the music power of the C64.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1505 \posy310 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5757 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li65 \fi445 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx65 \tx510 \tqr \tx7289 On the other hand, you may be interested in learning how to write your own sound\_generation programs. If so, you'll find the Commodore 128, used in C128 mode, the ideal vehicle. The new BASIC 7.0 makes controlling the sound much easier than on previous Commodore com\-puters, and the instant feedback provided by BASIC means that you can easily experiment with the various statements until you achieve just the effect you like.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx1505 \posy310 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5757 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi445 \ri53 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx495 \tqr \tx7286 Of course, you can also write programs in C64 mode\'97using BASIC 2.0\'97that generate sound. However, you will be at a considerable disad\-vantage, since the Commodore 64 (and the C64 mode on the Commodore 128) lack the BASIC commands which make programming sound in the C128 mode so easy. Instead, you must resort to using BASIC's POKE instruction to insert numbers into certain memory locations (which are in turn connected to the SID chip). Having to know what numbers to POKE in, and what memory locations to POKE them into, makes pro\-gramming sound effects considerably more difficult and inflexible in C64 mode than in C128 mode.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn1455 \margrsxn1525 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx495 \tqr \tx7286 {\pard \posx1521 \posy6395 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw3008 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f1 \i \pard \s5 \posx1521 \posy6395 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw3008 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2957 In the Chips with SID\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2957 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1515 \posy6797 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4487 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s6 \posx1515 \posy6797 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4487 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7297 The Commodore 128 has a special custom\_made chip, called SID (for Sound Interface Device), which handles all its sound generation tasks. This chip can produce three separate channels, (called voices) of sound at the same time. Thus the C128 can easily play music with three\_part harmony. The individual character of each of these three voices can be separately modified, so that one voice can sound like a trumpet, another like a guitar, and a third like a piano. This is achieved by modifying the waveform and the envelope of the sound. We'll describe what this means later in the chapter. By changing the envelope and waveform any of the three voices can also be made to produce a rich variety of sound effects, from machine guns and bombs falling, to the rustle of leaves on an autumn afternoon.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx1515 \posy6797 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4487 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li53 \fi441 \ri68 \sl-259 \tx53 \tx494 \tqr \tx7279 Once you know how to use BASIC to create sounds, you can add sound effects or music to any program you write. Most people think about games when they think about sound effects, and certainly the Commodore is a perfect environment for creating games with great graphics and as\-tonishing sound effects. However, sound is also useful in programs besides\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx53 \tx494 \tqr \tx7279 {\pard \posx10756 \posy12 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw554 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx10756 \posy12 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw554 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-175 \tx50 \tqr \tx503 \_sit\par 
}\pard \sl-175 \tx50 \tqr \tx503 {\pard \posx11232 \posy336 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1600 \absw7334 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx11232 \posy336 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1600 \absw7334 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-257 \tx50 \tqr \tx7283 games, such as word\_processor and spreadsheet programs. For instance, keystrokes can be signalled by a small clicking sound, so you're sure you've pressed the key, and incorrect input can be signalled by beeps. The sound\_generating abilities of the Commodore 128 can even be used in electronics. For example, the C128 could generate a variety of wave\-forms, including white noise, to test audio and TV equipment.\par 
}\pard \sl-257 \tx50 \tqr \tx7283 {\pard \posx11256 \posy2254 \phpg \pvpg \absh-651 \absw4036 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f1 \i \pard \s10 \posx11256 \posy2254 \phpg \pvpg \absh-651 \absw4036 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-303 \tx50 \tqr \tx3985 What Equipment Do You Need to Use Sound?\par 
}\pard \sl-303 \tx50 \tqr \tx3985 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11235 \posy2931 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5026 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s11 \posx11235 \posy2931 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5026 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri65 \sl-267 \tx50 \tqr \tx7273 Although the Commodore 128 has the SID sound generator chip built into it, the output of this chip needs to be amplified by an external device before it is audible, since there is no amplifier or speaker built into the C128.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s12 \posx11235 \posy2931 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5026 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi441 \ri61 \sl-263 \tx56 \tx497 \tqr \tx7277 Often, the TV set or monitor you're using as a display has an amplifier and speaker built in. The new Commodore 1902 color monitor, for ex\-ample, has these features, as well as a volume control. By connecting the audio output from the C128 (either from the TV outlet or the Direct Video connection) to your display device, you'll be able to hear the sounds the C128 is making. (See the diagram in the chapter on peripherals for where these connections are.)\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s13 \posx11235 \posy2931 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5026 \absw7339 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li63 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx63 \tx504 \tqr \tx7288 You can also run this audio output to your stereo amplifier (although the sound will not be in stereo). This is useful if you're using a monitor without audio capability. With the volume turned up and the right pro\-gram, this can generate awe\_inspiring effects: you (and your neighbors too, if you're not careful) will swear that an intergalactic battle cruiser is passing overhead. Even at low volume levels your stereo amplifier will produce better sound, and will do a better job of reproducing the very high and very low tones of which the Commodore 128 is capable.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx63 \tx504 \tqr \tx7288 {\pard \posx10677 \posy8213 \phpg \pvpg \absh-745 \absw5432 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs33 \f2 \b \pard \s14 \posx10677 \posy8213 \phpg \pvpg \absh-745 \absw5432 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-323 \tx50 \tqr \tx5381 Commercial Software and Hardware for Sound Generation\par 
}\pard \sl-323 \tx50 \tqr \tx5381 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11253 \posy9009 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2142 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s15 \posx11253 \posy9009 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2142 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri55 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7277 There is a wide variety of music software and add\_on hardware devices, such as keyboards, already available for the Commodore 64. All of these products will work with the Commodore 128 in C64 mode, and some may also work in C128 mode. Manufacturers are also beginning to produce products specifically for the C128 mode.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s16 \posx11253 \posy9009 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2142 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li71 \fi436 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx71 \tx507 \tqr \tx7282 In this section we'll describe, in general terms, what some of these products do. We won't describe specific products; rather we'll try to give you an idea of what sort of features are available and what to look for\par 
}\pard \sl-263 \tx71 \tx507 \tqr \tx7282 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7267 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl252 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #513;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx3378 \ql \sl319 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #514;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx7277 \qj \li10596 \ri54 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #515;}
{\s5 \tx52 \tx494 \tqr \tx7274 \qj \li10594 \fi442 \ri57 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #516;}
{\s6 \tx54 \tx496 \tqr \tx7281 \qj \li10592 \fi442 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #517;}
{\s7 \tx57 \tx499 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10589 \fi442 \ri53 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #518;}
{\s8 \tx59 \tx501 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10587 \fi442 \ri53 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #519;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tqr \tx2180 \ql \sl319 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #520;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx7287 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #521;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx7263 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #522;}
{\s12 \tqr \tx3705 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #523;}
{\s13 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #524;}
{\s14 \tx60 \tx504 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10586 \fi444 \ri63 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #525;}
{\s15 \tx50 \tqr \tx2511 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #526;}
{\s16 \tqr \tx7272 \qj \li10596 \ri60 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #527;}
{\s17 \tx67 \tx510 \tqr \tx7280 \qj \li10579 \fi443 \ri52 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext17 OmniPage #528;}
{\s18 \tx60 \tx503 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li10586 \fi443 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext18 OmniPage #529;}
{\s19 \tx52 \tqr \tx2803 \ql \sl261 \li10594 \ri4508 \sbasedon0 \snext19 OmniPage #530;}
{\s20 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext20 OmniPage #531;}
}\par {\pard \posx1589 \posy508 \phpg \pvpg \absh-817 \absw7318 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1589 \posy508 \phpg \pvpg \absh-817 \absw7318 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-252 \tx50 \tqr \tx7267 when buying music\_oriented programs and equipment for your Commo\-dore 128. At the end of the chapter we include a list of companies pro\-ducing music software and hardware.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn1536 \margrsxn1524 \pard \sl-252 \tx50 \tqr \tx7267 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1588 \posy1618 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw3429 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f1 \i \pard \s3 \posx1588 \posy1618 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw3429 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx3378 Add\_on Piano Keyboards\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx3378 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1586 \posy2043 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7623 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s4 \posx1586 \posy2043 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7623 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri54 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7277 It's possible to use the regular keyboard keys on the Commodore 128 for playing and composing music. Some available software uses this ap\-proach. Sometimes only one row of keys is used, accessing a single octave; other products use all four rows of keys, assigning each row to a different octave.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx1586 \posy2043 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7623 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li52 \fi442 \ri57 \sl-260 \tx52 \tx494 \tqr \tx7274 However, for anyone used to playing the piano or a similar keyboard instrument, using typewriter type keys to play music is difficult. To solve this problem, a variety of manufacturers offer piano\_style keyboards which can be added to the C128. Which one of these is right for you depends on how serious you are about music on the Commodore 128, and how deep your pocketbook is.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx1586 \posy2043 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7623 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li54 \fi442 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx54 \tx496 \tqr \tx7281 The simplest and least expensive (less than $50) of these keyboards fits right over the C128 keyboard. It's called an overlay keyboard. It looks like a small piano keyboard, but pressing each note causes one of the character keys on the keyboard to be depressed. Special software interprets these key presses and translates them into musical notes. This type of keyboard is not as easy to learn to play as a real piano or synthesizer keyboard, and you probably won't be able to play as fast on it. However, practice makes perfect, and there are virtuosos of even this humble ap\-proach to keying in music.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx1586 \posy2043 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7623 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li57 \fi442 \ri53 \sl-261 \tx57 \tx499 \tqr \tx7278 The next step up in sophistication are membrane\_type keyboards which plug into the controller (joystick) ports of the C128. These are somewhat more convenient to use than the overlay keyboard, but still do not have the same action or feel as a synthesizer keyboard. Cost is between $50 and $100.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx1586 \posy2043 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7623 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \fi442 \ri53 \sl-261 \tx59 \tx501 \tqr \tx7278 If you don't mind spending a little more\'97from $150 to $300\'97you can buy a full\_featured add\_on keyboard that rivals those on commercial\-grade synthesizers. A variety of firms makes these keyboards, which typ\-ically feature several octaves of notes.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx59 \tx501 \tqr \tx7278 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1606 \posy9973 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2231 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f1 \i \pard \s9 \posx1606 \posy9973 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2231 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2180 Music Software\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2180 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1594 \posy10398 \phpg \pvpg \absh-837 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s10 \posx1594 \posy10398 \phpg \pvpg \absh-837 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 Music software available for the Commodore 128 serves a variety of func\-tions. We'll talk about each of these functions in turn, although some software integrates some or all of the functions together in one product.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11240 \posy612 \phpg \pvpg \absh-567 \absw7314 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s11 \posx11240 \posy612 \phpg \pvpg \absh-567 \absw7314 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx7263 Other manufacturers offer specific products aimed at specific functions, but at lower prices than the integrated products.\par 
}\pard \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx7263 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11254 \posy1354 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3756 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s12 \posx11254 \posy1354 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3756 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3705 As a Simple Musical Instrument\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3705 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11240 \posy1724 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3695 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s13 \posx11240 \posy1724 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3695 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7291 First, you can simply use the Commodore 128 as a musical instrument. Either using the regular Commodore 128 keyboard, or using an add\_on keyboard, you play a melody, and the C128 generates the sounds of the notes and sends them out to be amplified by your TV set, monitor, or stereo amplifier. In this mode the C128 is operating as a simple music synthesizer. You can typically play using a variety of different voices and instruments.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s14 \posx11240 \posy1724 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3695 \absw7342 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi444 \ri63 \sl-261 \tx60 \tx504 \tqr \tx7278 Some packages offer a rhythm section which plays along with you, giving you a choice of rock, waltz, samba, and so forth. You can change octaves, use vibrato, change the tempo, and mold the sound of the C128 to imitate a wide variety of instruments, all while you're playing. Some products let you play several notes at once, or play notes and chords at the same time. However, no more than three notes can be played at once, since the Commodore 128 has only three voices.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx60 \tx504 \tqr \tx7278 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11263 \posy5605 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2562 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s15 \posx11263 \posy5605 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2562 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2511 As a Playback Device\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2511 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11250 \posy5974 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4497 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s16 \posx11250 \posy5974 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4497 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri60 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7272 Many software manufacturers have recorded albums of music which you can play on your Commodore 128, somewhat as if it were a record or tape player. The music generally comes on disks, and must be used with a master program to interpret the disks and turn them into music. Almost every variety of music has been recorded for the C128: rock, jazz, classical, country, and so on.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s17 \posx11250 \posy5974 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4497 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li67 \fi443 \ri52 \sl-261 \tx67 \tx510 \tqr \tx7280 You can not only listen to these albums, you can also use them as take\_off points for your own experimentation. You can rewrite them, using the composing programs to be described below. You can eliminate one voice in a composition and play that part yourself. You can change the voices, instruments, and tempo, to see what new effects you can create.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s18 \posx11250 \posy5974 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4497 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi443 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx60 \tx503 \tqr \tx7282 Many of these playback programs show you the note being played on the screen, as it's being played. Typically these programs display the note on a musical staff. Other programs provide a more complex visual display to accompany the music. This can range from simple shapes and colors to complex animation: in effect you're watching a complete computer\-generated video. i\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx60 \tx503 \tqr \tx7282 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11275 \posy10643 \phpg \pvpg \absh-942 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s19 \posx11275 \posy10643 \phpg \pvpg \absh-942 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \li52 \ri4508 \sl-261 \tx52 \tqr \tx2803 As Composition Devices\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s20 \posx11275 \posy10643 \phpg \pvpg \absh-942 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 Probably the most exciting kind of music software for the Commodore 128 lets you compose your own music. Typically, as you write notes, they are\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx59 \tqr \tx7287 \qj \li10587 \ri50 \sl257 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #769;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx7279 \qj \li10596 \fi435 \ri58 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #770;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx1870 \ql \sl253 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #771;}
{\s5 \tx67 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li10579 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #772;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7271 \qj \li10596 \fi440 \ri76 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #773;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx1940 \ql \sl363 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #774;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #775;}
{\s9 \tx60 \tx509 \tqr \tx7261 \qj \li10586 \fi449 \ri67 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #776;}
{\s10 \tx54 \tqr \tx1597 \ql \sl304 \li10592 \ri5772 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #777;}
{\s11 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li10596 \ri76 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #778;}
{\s12 \tx69 \tx509 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li10577 \fi440 \ri77 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #779;}
{\s13 \tx74 \tx514 \tqr \tx7304 \qj \li10572 \fi440 \ri65 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #780;}
{\s14 \tx81 \tx521 \tqr \tx7319 \qj \li10565 \fi440 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #781;}
{\s15 \tx50 \tqr \tx1165 \ql \sl304 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #782;}
{\s16 \tqr \tx7280 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #783;}
}\par {\pard \posx1550 \posy360 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4200 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1550 \posy360 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4200 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \ri50 \sl-257 \tx59 \tqr \tx7287 stored in memory where they can be retrieved and modified. There are a variety of different ways to do this, depending on the particular software package. With some products you type the notes in at the keyboard; with others you use the joystick to position notes on a musical staff shown on the screen. You can use sharps and flats, and notes of different duration such as half, quarter, and sixteenth notes. You can write in three different voices, and assign the sound of different instruments to each voice. When you've finished any part of the music, you can play it to see how it sounds. If you don't like it, you can edit it and replay it until you do.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1550 \posy360 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4200 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi435 \ri58 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx7279 Many programs that let you play or compose music also let you print out the musical score on your printer. If you're a composer, this is inva\-luable. As soon as you finish your masterpiece, you can print it out, then mail off copies to your agent or the major studios so you can start making your fortune. A typical printout will have all the professional features of printed music: treble and bass clefs, sharps and flats, different length notes, key signatures, and so forth.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn906 \margrsxn1518 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx485 \tqr \tx7279 {\pard \posx1560 \posy4762 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw1921 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f1 \b \pard \s4 \posx1560 \posy4762 \phpg \pvpg \absh-315 \absw1921 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx1870 Teaching Music\par 
}\pard \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx1870 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1538 \posy5150 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2403 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx1538 \posy5150 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2403 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li67 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx67 \tqr \tx7297 There are several programs on the market which teach you music, or teach you specifically about the music\_generation capabilities of the SID chip. These can provide a far more interactive and exciting environment for learning about music than traditional classroom methods.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx1538 \posy5150 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2403 \absw7348 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi440 \ri76 \sl-259 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7271 We've given you some idea of the capabilities of commercial sound\-generation software. But suppose you want to write your own sound\-generating programs? The next sections explore how sound works on the Commodore 128, and how you can use BASIC 7.0 to take control of the sound generation.\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7271 {\pard \posx956 \posy7818 \phpg \pvpg \absh-428 \absw1991 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs33 \f2 \pard \s7 \posx956 \posy7818 \phpg \pvpg \absh-428 \absw1991 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-363 \tx50 \tqr \tx1940 Sound Ideas\par 
}\pard \sl-363 \tx50 \tqr \tx1940 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1526 \posy8278 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2664 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx1526 \posy8278 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2664 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7278 If you want to write your own programs to generate sounds, you'll need to know something about sound in general, and about how the SID chip "thinks" about sound. That's the purpose of this section. In the section following this one, we'll show you what BASIC statements to use to achieve the effects we describe here. If you're already an old hand at programming sound on the Commodore 64, and you just want to learn about the new statements for generating sound in BASIC 7.0, then you can skip this section and go on to the next one, called Sound and BASIC 7.0.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx1526 \posy8278 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2664 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi449 \ri67 \sl-255 \tx60 \tx509 \tqr \tx7261 Simple musical sounds have three major characteristics: frequency, volume, and duration. Let's look at these in turn.\par 
}\pard \sl-255 \tx60 \tx509 \tqr \tx7261 {\pard \posx11205 \posy383 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7734 \absw7370 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs27 \f3 \i \pard \s10 \posx11205 \posy383 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7734 \absw7370 \dxfrtext200 \li54 \ri5772 \sl-304 \tx54 \tqr \tx1597 Frequency\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s11 \posx11205 \posy383 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7734 \absw7370 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri76 \sl-258 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 One of the most important aspects of any sound is its frequency. The frequency specifies how high or how low a pitch the sound has: a flute is higher\_pitched than a cello; that is, its sound has a higher frequency. Frequency is measured in cycles per second, or cps. Human hearing extends from about 40 cps to somewhat under 20,000 cps, depending on the particular person. The C128 can't generate this wide a range of tones directly: the highest it can generate is somewhere around 4,000 cps. However, the harmonics produced by the SID chip extend much higher. (We'll define harmonics in a moment.)\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s12 \posx11205 \posy383 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7734 \absw7370 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li69 \fi440 \ri77 \sl-260 \tx69 \tx509 \tqr \tx7292 When you program the C128 to generate a sound, you'll give the SID chip a number to tell it what frequency you want to generate. This number is not the frequency itself, but a number related to it, as we'll see in the section on BASIC.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s13 \posx11205 \posy383 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7734 \absw7370 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li74 \fi440 \ri65 \sl-261 \tx74 \tx514 \tqr \tx7304 All sound consists of waves in the air. These waves can be thought of as looking something like waves in the ocean, with troughs and crests repeating themselves over and over. In a high\_pitched (high\_frequency) sound the crests are closer together; in a low\_pitched (low\_frequency3 sound they are further apart.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s14 \posx11205 \posy383 \phpg \pvpg \absh-7734 \absw7370 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li81 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx81 \tx521 \tqr \tx7319 We mentioned harmonics. What are they? Briefly, almost any musical note consists not only of the fundamental frequency of the note, but of a variety of other frequencies as well. The other frequencies are multiples of the original frequency, and are called harmonics. The first harmonic is twice the frequency of the note itself. The second harmonic is three times the original frequency, and so forth. The harmonics are not as loud as the original frequency. Which specific harmonics are loud, and which soft, determines the characteristics of the note: its timbre and voice. It is these characteristics which the SID chip alters to generate the sounds of different instruments.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx81 \tx521 \tqr \tx7319 {\pard \posx11291 \posy8434 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw1216 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs27 \f3 \i \pard \s15 \posx11291 \posy8434 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw1216 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1165 Volume\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1165 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11262 \posy8846 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1879 \absw7331 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 \pard \s16 \posx11262 \posy8846 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1879 \absw7331 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7280 Next to the frequency, the volume (sometimes called "loudness" or "am\-plitude") of a sound is probably its most obvious feature. If you think of sound as a series of waves, then the volume is the height of the waves. You can control the volume of all the sound output of the Commodore 128 from your program, in much the same way that you can turn down the volume on a radio with a knob. You can also regulate the volume of sounds individually. We'll have more to say about this later.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7280 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx1376 \ql \sl291 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1025;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx407 \ql \sl132 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1026;}
{\s4 \tx80 \tqr \tx7314 \qj \li10566 \ri50 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1027;}
{\s5 \tx63 \tx548 \tqr \tx7296 \qj \li10583 \fi485 \ri68 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1028;}
{\s6 \tx56 \tx541 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li10590 \fi485 \ri71 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1029;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tx535 \tqr \tx7261 \qj \li10596 \fi485 \ri103 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1030;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tqr \tx6259 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1031;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx7267 \qj \li10596 \ri87 \sl257 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #1032;}
{\s10 \tx82 \tx516 \tqr \tx7304 \qj \li10564 \fi434 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #1033;}
{\s11 \tx50 \tqr \tx1701 \ql \sl291 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #1034;}
{\s12 \tqr \tx7261 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #1035;}
{\s13 \tqr \tx4511 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #1036;}
}\par {\pard \posx1848 \posy574 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw1427 \dxfrtext200 \fs28 \f0 \i \pard \s2 \posx1848 \posy574 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw1427 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-291 \tx50 \tqr \tx1376 Duration\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn1756 \margrsxn1390 \pard \sl-291 \tx50 \tqr \tx1376 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx8900 \posy154 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw458 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx8900 \posy154 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw458 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-132 \tx50 \tqr \tx407 \_\pard \posx8900 \posy154 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw458 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-132 \tx50 \tqr \tx407 \par 
}\pard \sl-132 \tx50 \tqr \tx407 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1806 \posy986 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5513 \absw7365 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s4 \posx1806 \posy986 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5513 \absw7365 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li80 \ri50 \sl-255 \tx80 \tqr \tx7314 Any sound has a given duration, or length of time it lasts. The crack of a stick breaking, for instance, is shorter than the wail of a train whistle. When you use the Commodore 128 to generate sound, you'll give it a number to tell it how long a sound should last.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx1806 \posy986 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5513 \absw7365 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li63 \fi485 \ri68 \sl-260 \tx63 \tx548 \tqr \tx7296 There are several aspects to specifying duration in music. First, there is tempo. The tempo specifies how long a measure is. A measure is a fundamental unit of music notation. There are a certain fixed number of notes in each measure. A note can be a whole note, a half note, which is half as long as a whole note, a quarter note (half as long as a half note), an eighth not\'e8, or a sixteenth note. The exact number of notes in a measure depends on the time of the music. For instance, if a musical piece is in 4/4 time, then there will be four quarter notes (or two half notes or one whole note) in a measure. If a piece is in 3/4 (waltz) time, then there will be three quarter notes in a measure.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx1806 \posy986 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5513 \absw7365 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi485 \ri71 \sl-258 \tx56 \tx541 \tqr \tx7293 So to establish how long a musical note will last, you need to specify both the tempo, and the kind of note it is: whether half, quarter, or whatever. We'll have more to say about musical notation when we discuss the PLAY statement in the next section.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s7 \posx1806 \posy986 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5513 \absw7365 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi485 \ri103 \sl-259 \tx50 \tx535 \tqr \tx7261 Figure 7\_1 shows the frequency, duration, and volume of some typical sound waves. If you connected a microphone to an oscilloscope (a device that makes pictures of electrical wave forms), and held the microphone\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx50 \tx535 \tqr \tx7261 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2301 \posy7034 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw6310 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s8 \posx2301 \posy7034 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw6310 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx6259 Figure 7\_1. Frequency, Volume, and Duration of Sound Waves\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx6259 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11349 \posy603 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2376 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s9 \posx11349 \posy603 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2376 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri87 \sl-257 \tx50 \tqr \tx7267 next to a source of sound, you would see waves shaped something like this. Usually, however, a note generated by a musical instrument is con\-siderably more complicated than these simple shapes.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s10 \posx11349 \posy603 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2376 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li82 \fi434 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx82 \tx516 \tqr \tx7304 On many home computers what we have told you about frequency, volume, and duration is all you need to know about sound. These com\-puters can make simple beeping sounds of different pitches, but that's all. They cannot perform the more sophisiticated sound operations needed to shape the sounds to accurately imitate different musical instruments and other effects.\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx82 \tx516 \tqr \tx7304 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11430 \posy3270 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw1752 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f0 \i \pard \s11 \posx11430 \posy3270 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw1752 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-291 \tx50 \tqr \tx1701 Wave Forms\par 
}\pard \sl-291 \tx50 \tqr \tx1701 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11409 \posy3702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-832 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s12 \posx11409 \posy3702 \phpg \pvpg \absh-832 \absw7312 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 In Figure 7\_1 we showed only one kind of waveform: the triangle. However, the SID chip can also generate several others: sawtooth, noise, and pulse. These four waveforms are shown in Figure 7\_2.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx12872 \posy5428 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4562 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s13 \posx12872 \posy5428 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4562 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4511 Figure 7\_2. The Four Different Wave Forms\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4511 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7268 \qj \li10596 \fi441 \ri77 \sl251 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1281;}
{\s3 \tx60 \tx501 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li10586 \fi441 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1282;}
{\s4 \tx61 \tx502 \tqr \tx7268 \qj \li10585 \fi441 \ri77 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1283;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx1898 \ql \sl304 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1284;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7293 \qj \li10596 \ri52 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1285;}
{\s7 \tx85 \tx524 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li10561 \fi439 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1286;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tqr \tx922 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1287;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx7280 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #1288;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx868 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #1289;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx7273 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl256 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #1290;}
{\s12 \tqr \tx1042 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #1291;}
{\s13 \tqr \tx7290 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #1292;}
{\s14 \tqr \tx1034 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #1293;}
{\s15 \tqr \tx7274 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #1294;}
{\s16 \tqr \tx2587 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #1295;}
{\s17 \tx55 \tqr \tx7268 \qj \li10591 \ri74 \sl265 \sbasedon0 \snext17 OmniPage #1296;}
{\s18 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li10596 \fi440 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext18 OmniPage #1297;}
{\s19 \tx51 \tx491 \tqr \tx7276 \qj \li10595 \fi440 \ri66 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext19 OmniPage #1298;}
}\par {\pard \posx1464 \posy365 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4459 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx1464 \posy365 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4459 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri77 \sl-251 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7268 Sawtooth and triangle are similar in that they produce simple melodic sounds. The triangle sounds are more mellow, like woodwinds; while the sawtooth is brassier. (These sounds are different because they have differ\-ent harmonics.)\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1464 \posy365 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4459 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx60 \tx501 \tqr \tx7295 The noise waveform is used for an entirely different purpose. Rather than generating musical tones, it generates rumbling and hissing sounds. It's used for sound effects such as explosions, gunshots, and avalanches. It achieves these effects by using a very irregular waveform. This creates what's called "white" noise, a mixture of many different frequencies which sounds like static. Low frequencies produce a rumbling sound, while higher frequencies produce "shhh" and "sass" sounds. By molding this white noise with the envelope (to be described next) or filters, you can create an amazing variety of effects.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx1464 \posy365 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4459 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li61 \fi441 \ri77 \sl-262 \tx61 \tx502 \tqr \tx7268 The pulse wave generates tones which work best at reproducing certain kinds of instruments, such as pianos. This waveform requires you to specify the width of the pulses. Different pulse widths produce different effects.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn1414 \margrsxn1478 \pard \sl-262 \tx61 \tx502 \tqr \tx7268 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1506 \posy5141 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw1949 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f1 \i \pard \s5 \posx1506 \posy5141 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw1949 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1898 The Envelope\par 
}\pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx1898 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1469 \posy5556 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3444 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s6 \posx1469 \posy5556 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3444 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri52 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7293 When a note is played on a musical instrument\'97a violin, for example \'97it doesn't simply start suddenly, continue at a fixed volume for a period of time, and then stop suddenly, as Figure 7\_1 implies. If you could look at a picture of the sound made by a real musical instrument on the oscilloscope, you'd see something different and more complicated hap\-pening. Imagine a note as having a lifetime of its own, and going through a series of phases in its life. A man is born, grows larger and stronger, loses some of his strength but hangs in there for many decades, and finally dies. A musical note goes through a similar process, but its phases are called attack, decay, sustain, and release.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx1469 \posy5556 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3444 \absw7346 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li85 \fi439 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx85 \tx524 \tqr \tx7295 When these four parts of the note are put together, the resulting waveform is called the envelope of the note. Let's look at the envelope's parts in more detail.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx85 \tx524 \tqr \tx7295 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1506 \posy9205 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw973 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s8 \posx1506 \posy9205 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw973 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx922 Attack\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx922 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1493 \posy9589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1617 \absw7331 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s9 \posx1493 \posy9589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1617 \absw7331 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7280 First, the sound of our violin note takes a certain length of time to build up to a peak volume. This length of time is called the attack, and can be thought of as the growth period of the note. The attack does not take a long time (it's measured in.milliseconds, or thousandths of a second), but it does influence how the note will sound. Cymbals, for instance, have a shorter attack than a violin or flute.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7280 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11314 \posy415 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw919 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s10 \posx11314 \posy415 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw919 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx868 Dec;yr\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx868 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11298 \posy791 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1082 \absw7324 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s11 \posx11298 \posy791 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1082 \absw7324 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-256 \tx50 \tqr \tx7273 Once the note has reached it's peak volume, it immediately begins to die away. You can think of this as a person beginning to lose maximum athletic ability soon after reaching full size\'97peak ability begins to decline almost as soon as it's been achieved.\par 
}\pard \sl-256 \tx50 \tqr \tx7273 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11315 \posy2076 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw1093 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s12 \posx11315 \posy2076 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw1093 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx1042 Sustain\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx1042 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11292 \posy2456 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1611 \absw7341 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s13 \posx11292 \posy2456 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1611 \absw7341 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7290 During its decay phase, a note will lose some of its strength, but not all. It will drop to a level somewhat lower than its peak. This level is called the sustain level. Note that sustain refers to a volume level, not to a length of time, as with attack and decay. The length of time that a note remains at the sustain level is determined by the duration of the note, as mentioned earlier.\par 
}\pard \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7290 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11306 \posy4276 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw1085 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s14 \posx11306 \posy4276 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw1085 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx1034 Release\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx1034 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11287 \posy4660 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s15 \posx11287 \posy4660 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 After a note has been sounded for a certain length of time (the duration), it comes to an end. However, it does not end instantly, but dies away more or less gradually. The length of time during which it dies away is called the release part of the note.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11303 \posy5961 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2638 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s16 \posx11303 \posy5961 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2638 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2587 Putting It All Together\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2587 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11283 \posy6345 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5014 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s17 \posx11283 \posy6345 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5014 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li55 \ri74 \sl-265 \tx55 \tqr \tx7268 Figure 7\_3 shows the envelope of a note with the attack, decay, sustain and release phases.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s18 \posx11283 \posy6345 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5014 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi440 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx490 \tqr \tx7292 Notice that the envelope serves only to shape the existing sound waves. The sound waves and the envelope are different kinds of things. The sound waves have their own frequency and duration, which is not changed by the envelope. The envelope only specifies how the waves will grow and die away. Notice that in the diagrams of the sound waves we showed both the upper and lower parts of the waves; while in the diagram of the envelope only the upper parts of the soundwaves are shown. This is done only to simplify the diagram, the individual waves still oscillate both above and below the line, even though the oscillations below the line are not shown.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s19 \posx11283 \posy6345 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5014 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \fi440 \ri66 \sl-260 \tx51 \tx491 \tqr \tx7276 Not all instruments use all four phases of the envelope. Woodwinds (like clarinets and flutes) do, as do the strings (violins) and the brass instruments (trumpets and French horns). But percussion instruments may omit the sustain phase altogether. In the case of a piano (a percussion instrument), there is a decay phase, so that the envelope goes up sharply, slides down the decay slope, and then during release drops to zero; but with drums and cymbals the decay and release phases are merged together,\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx51 \tx491 \tqr \tx7276 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx60 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10586 \ri57 \sl249 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1537;}
{\s3 \tx69 \tx510 \tqr \tx7285 \qj \li10577 \fi441 \ri50 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1538;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7276 \qj \li10596 \fi441 \ri59 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1539;}
{\s5 \tx50 \tqr \tx1075 \ql \sl312 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1540;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7289 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl264 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1541;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx4569 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1542;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7274 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1543;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx1027 \ql \sl312 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #1544;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx7285 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #1545;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx1057 \ql \sl312 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #1546;}
{\s12 \tqr \tx7267 \qj \li10596 \ri61 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #1547;}
{\s13 \tx52 \tx487 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10594 \fi435 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #1548;}
}\par {\pard \posx1485 \posy332 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3147 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1485 \posy332 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3147 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \ri57 \sl-249 \tx60 \tqr \tx7278 so that their envelope goes up sharply, and then returns immediately to zero. This is shown in Figure 7\_4.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1485 \posy332 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3147 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li69 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-255 \tx69 \tx510 \tqr \tx7285 Actually, there is usually a variety of different envelope shapes which will generate the sound of a particular instrument. Often, for instance, you can eliminate either the decay or the release phase and achieve roughly the same effect.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx1485 \posy332 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3147 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri59 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7276 In the next section of this chapter, on BASIC 7.0, you'll learn how to generate the sounds of particular instruments by designing "custom" envelopes; that is, selecting appropriate values for attack, decay, sustain, and release. Commodore has also built the envelopes for some instruments right into BASIC; for these instruments you don't need to design your own envelope.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn1430 \margrsxn1452 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7276 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1508 \posy3811 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw1126 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f1 \i \pard \s5 \posx1508 \posy3811 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw1126 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx1075 Sweep\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx1075 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1480 \posy4212 \phpg \pvpg \absh-576 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s6 \posx1480 \posy4212 \phpg \pvpg \absh-576 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-264 \tx50 \tqr \tx7289 Another way that notes can be modified by the \fs23 \f2 SID \fs25 \f0 chip is by using sweep. Sweep lets you start a note at a certain frequency and then vary the\par 
}\pard \sl-264 \tx50 \tqr \tx7289 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2888 \posy5458 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4620 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f3 \b \pard \s7 \posx2888 \posy5458 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4620 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4569 Figure 7\_3. The Envelope of a Musical Note\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4569 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11303 \posy366 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1079 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx11303 \posy366 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1079 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 frequency while the note is in progress. You need to tell \fs23 \f2 SID \fs25 \f0 whether you want the sweep to go up or down, what frequency you want to end on, and what frequency step value to use in sweeping (this determines how rapidly the sweep will take place).\par 
}\pard \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11343 \posy1757 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw1078 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f1 \i \pard \s9 \posx11343 \posy1757 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw1078 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx1027 Voices\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx1027 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11309 \posy2162 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s10 \posx11309 \posy2162 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2136 \absw7336 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7285 We've already mentioned that the \fs23 \f2 SID \fs25 \f0 chip is capable of producing three independent voices or channels of sound output. Each of these voices can be programmed independently, so the effect is almost like that of having three separate sound chips. Each voice can be given its own frequency, duration, and envelope. Notice, however, that the volume control on the \fs23 \f2 SID \fs25 \f0 chip operates on all three voices at once. You can specify the sustain volume for individual voices, but the overall volume affects them all the same way.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7285 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11331 \posy4621 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw1108 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs28 \f1 \i \pard \s11 \posx11331 \posy4621 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw1108 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx1057 Filters\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx1057 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11330 \posy5026 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1601 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s12 \posx11330 \posy5026 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1601 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri61 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7267 Besides the envelope, there are other more subtle ways to modify the sounds created by the SID chip. One way is through the use of filters.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s13 \posx11330 \posy5026 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1601 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li52 \fi435 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx52 \tx487 \tqr \tx7278 A filter is an electronic circuit which blocks out certain frequencies of sound. The bass and treble tone controls of your stereo are filters. When you turn the treble control to its minimum setting, the higher\_frequency parts of the sound are filtered out; and when you turn the bass knob to\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx52 \tx487 \tqr \tx7278 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl253 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1793;}
{\s3 \tx66 \tqr \tx3086 \ql \sl268 \li10580 \ri4238 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1794;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1795;}
{\s5 \tx84 \tqr \tx2064 \ql \sl268 \li10562 \ri5296 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1796;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tqr \tx7310 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1797;}
{\s7 \tx55 \tx498 \tqr \tx7295 \qj \li10591 \fi443 \ri65 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1798;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tqr \tx1896 \ql \sl268 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1799;}
{\s9 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #1800;}
{\s10 \tx51 \tx494 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10595 \fi443 \ri54 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #1801;}
{\s11 \tx51 \tx494 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li10595 \fi443 \ri50 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #1802;}
{\s12 \tx50 \tx494 \tqr \tx7272 \qj \li10596 \fi444 \ri53 \sl256 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #1803;}
{\s13 \tx69 \tx513 \tqr \tx7275 \qj \li10577 \fi444 \ri50 \sl256 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #1804;}
{\s14 \tx50 \tqr \tx5063 \ql \sl319 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #1805;}
{\s15 \tqr \tx7289 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #1806;}
{\s16 \tx55 \tx494 \tqr \tx7271 \qj \li10591 \fi439 \ri68 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #1807;}
{\s17 \tx50 \tqr \tx2122 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext17 OmniPage #1808;}
}\par {\pard \posx1455 \posy451 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1072 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1455 \posy451 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1072 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 minimum, the lower\_frequency sounds are filtered out. You can use the filters in SID in very much the same way you use the tone controls on your stereo: to emphasize sounds of certain frequencies and diminish sounds of other frequencies.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn1378 \margrsxn1388 \pard \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1450 \posy1711 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1983 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx1450 \posy1711 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1983 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \li66 \ri4238 \sl-268 \tx66 \tqr \tx3086 High\_and Low\_pass Filters\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx1450 \posy1711 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1983 \absw7325 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 There are three kinds of filters available in the SID: high\_pass, low\_pass, and band\_pass. When you use the high\_pass filter, you block out the low\-frequency sounds, and pass the highs, just as you do when you turn down the bass on your stereo. This creates tinny, high\_pitched sounds. The low\-pass filter, on the other hand, blocks out the high frequencies, and creates deep, solid tones.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7274 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1428 \posy3886 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4063 \absw7361 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx1428 \posy3886 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4063 \absw7361 \dxfrtext200 \li84 \ri5296 \sl-268 \tx84 \tqr \tx2064 Cutoff Frequency\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx1428 \posy3886 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4063 \absw7361 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7310 What frequencies, exactly, are we talking about when we discuss filtering out the low or the high frequencies? On your stereo you have no way of knowing exactly what frequencies are eliminated when you turn the knob. The SID chip, on the other hand, lets you specify exactly where you want the cutoff point to be. For instance, if you're using a high\_pass filter and you specify a cutoff frequency of 1000 cps, then all the frequencies below 1000 cps will be filtered out or eliminated. Similarly, if you're using a low\_pass filter with the same cutoff frequency, then all the sounds with a frequency higher than 1000 cps will be filtered out.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx1428 \posy3886 \phpg \pvpg \absh-4063 \absw7361 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li55 \fi443 \ri65 \sl-261 \tx55 \tx498 \tqr \tx7295 The electronic circuits that act as filters aren't perfect, so the cutoff frequencies are not exact. The frequencies on the "wrong" side of the cutoff will be transmitted to some extent, but the further a frequency is from the cutoff, the more it will be attenuated. Figure 7\_5 shows the effect of filters on the sound levels at a range of frequencies.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx55 \tx498 \tqr \tx7295 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1445 \posy8132 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw1947 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s8 \posx1445 \posy8132 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw1947 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-268 \tx50 \tqr \tx1896 Bandpass Filter\par 
}\pard \sl-268 \tx50 \tqr \tx1896 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1430 \posy8494 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2914 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx1430 \posy8494 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2914 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7282 SID offers a third kind of filter called the bandpass filter. As its name implies, this circuit filters out both high and low frequencies, so that only those in the midrange can get through. In the case of this filter the term "cutoff" frequency is a misnomer, since the number used for this fre\-quency now specifies the point at which the sound will \fs25 \f2 \i pass \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 through the filter, rather than being cut off.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s10 \posx1430 \posy8494 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2914 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \fi443 \ri54 \sl-258 \tx51 \tx494 \tqr \tx7278 Figure 7\_5 shows the effects of these three kinds of filters on the amplitude of sound transmitted at different frequencies.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s11 \posx1430 \posy8494 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2914 \absw7333 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \fi443 \ri50 \sl-258 \tx51 \tx494 \tqr \tx7282 By combining the high\_and low\_pass filters you can create a filter which is the opposite of the band\_pass filter: it filters out mid\_range frequencies, rather than letting them pass through.\par 
}\pard \sl-258 \tx51 \tx494 \tqr \tx7282 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11357 \posy505 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1852 \absw7326 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s12 \posx11357 \posy505 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1852 \absw7326 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi444 \ri53 \sl-256 \tx50 \tx494 \tqr \tx7272 Another aspect of the filters that can be varied is the resonance. This determines how the frequencies of the sound near the cutoff frequency behave, and can be modified to achieve varying degrees of "sharpness" in the resulting sound.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s13 \posx11357 \posy505 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1852 \absw7326 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li69 \fi444 \ri50 \sl-256 \tx69 \tx513 \tqr \tx7275 Something to note about the filters is that they operate on all three voices at once. Thus you can't use filters to emphasize the bass on one voice and the treble on another.\par 
}\pard \sl-256 \tx69 \tx513 \tqr \tx7275 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11372 \posy2664 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw5114 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f3 \i \pard \s14 \posx11372 \posy2664 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw5114 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx5063 Ring Modulation and Synchronization\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx5063 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11383 \posy3084 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2656 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s15 \posx11383 \posy3084 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2656 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7289 It is possible to combine two voices together to produce interesting mus\-ical effects. In ring modulation, the outputs of two voices are added together. This can produce the "ringing" effect heard in bells and gongs. In synchronization two voices are logically ANDed together. This can be used to produce a rising and falling sound, such as a mosquito might make, and other complex harmonic structures.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s16 \posx11383 \posy3084 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2656 \absw7340 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li55 \fi439 \ri68 \sl-262 \tx55 \tx494 \tqr \tx7271 This review has only scratched the surface of sound generation on the Commodore 128. There are many other ways to shape and modify sound, but at this point let's turn to the specifics of sound generation with BASIC.\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx55 \tx494 \tqr \tx7271 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx14035 \posy6804 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2173 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \b \pard \s17 \posx14035 \posy6804 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2173 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2122 Figure 7\_5. Filters\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2122 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx3276 \ql \sl363 \li10596 \ri4609 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2049;}
{\s3 \tx620 \tqr \tx7835 \qj \li10026 \ri50 \sl257 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2050;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx2695 \ql \sl312 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2051;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7257 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2052;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx1419 \ql \sl232 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2053;}
{\s7 \tx60 \tx501 \tqr \tx7268 \qj \li10586 \fi441 \ri74 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #2054;}
{\s8 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li10596 \fi441 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #2055;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tqr \tx3161 \ql \sl312 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #2056;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx7278 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #2057;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx3488 \ql \sl276 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #2058;}
{\s12 \tqr \tx7284 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #2059;}
{\s13 \tqr \tx2840 \ql \sl232 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #2060;}
{\s14 \tqr \tx7263 \qj \li10596 \ri63 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #2061;}
{\s15 \tx68 \tx505 \tqr \tx7271 \qj \li10578 \fi437 \ri55 \sl256 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #2062;}
{\s16 \tx63 \tx500 \tqr \tx7276 \qj \li10583 \fi437 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #2063;}
{\s17 \tx50 \tqr \tx4115 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext17 OmniPage #2064;}
{\s18 \tqr \tx7261 \qj \li10596 \ri55 \sl250 \sbasedon0 \snext18 OmniPage #2065;}
{\s19 \tx56 \tx492 \tqr \tx7266 \qj \li10590 \fi436 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext19 OmniPage #2066;}
{\s20 \tx50 \tqr \tx6247 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext20 OmniPage #2067;}
{\s21 \tx2400 \tx2450 \tqc \tx3177 \tx4923 \tqc \tx5958 \tqr \tx4022 \ql \sl261 \li8246 \ri2275 \sbasedon0 \snext21 OmniPage #2068;}
{\s22 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3345 \tx5181 \tqc \tx6216 \tqr \tx6872 \ql \sl258 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext22 OmniPage #2069;}
{\s23 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \ql \sl241 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext23 OmniPage #2070;}
}\par {\pard \posx880 \posy572 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1538 \absw7886 \dxfrtext200 \fs33 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx880 \posy572 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1538 \absw7886 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri4609 \sl-363 \tx50 \tqr \tx3276 Sound and BASIC 7.0\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s3 \posx880 \posy572 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1538 \absw7886 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li620 \ri50 \sl-257 \tx620 \tqr \tx7835 In this section we'll describe the commands that BASIC 7.0 uses to control the sound and music capabilities of the SID chip. There are six of these statements: VOL, SOUND, ENVELOPE, PLAY, TEMPO, and FILTER. We'll describe each of these statements in turn.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn783 \margrsxn1464 \pard \sl-257 \tx620 \tqr \tx7835 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1479 \posy2437 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw2746 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f2 \i \pard \s4 \posx1479 \posy2437 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw2746 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2695 The VOL Statement\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2695 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1450 \posy2843 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1087 \absw7308 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx1450 \posy2843 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1087 \absw7308 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-258 \tx50 \tqr \tx7257 As we mentioned above, the volume of all three voices can be controlled together by one BASIC statement. This statement is VOL, for volume. This is one of the simpler statements, since it has only one parameter. Here's a typical program line in BASIC, using this statement:\par 
}\pard \sl-258 \tx50 \tqr \tx7257 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx876 \posy4156 \phpg \pvpg \absh-286 \absw1470 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f3 \pard \s6 \posx876 \posy4156 \phpg \pvpg \absh-286 \absw1470 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-232 \tx50 \tqr \tx1419 100 VOL 8\par 
}\pard \sl-232 \tx50 \tqr \tx1419 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1426 \posy4652 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2398 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s7 \posx1426 \posy4652 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2398 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi441 \ri74 \sl-261 \tx60 \tx501 \tqr \tx7268 The possible settings for the volume range from 0 to 15, where 0 is off (no sound) and 15 is maximum.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s8 \posx1426 \posy4652 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2398 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7292 Since you can adjust overall sound volume using the knob on your TV set or stereo, you may find yourself keeping the VOL at its highest level most of the time, and controlling individual notes with the sustain level. However VOL is useful in sound effects, and for turning the sound on and off. Notice however, that you must use \fs21 \f0 \i VOL \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 before you con use the SOUND statement to actually generate sound. You can't get any sound out of the SID chip until you've used VOL to select a non\_zero volume level.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7292 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1453 \posy7377 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw3212 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f2 \i \pard \s9 \posx1453 \posy7377 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw3212 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx3161 The SOUND Statement\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx3161 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1410 \posy7782 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1613 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s10 \posx1410 \posy7782 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1613 \absw7329 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7278 The SOUND statement is the keystone of BASIC \fs22 \f3 7.0's \fs25 \f1 sound effects capa\-bility. With it you can set the frequency, duration, sweep, and waveform of a sound. It's not usually used for playing music; the PLAY statement does that. SOUND is used for sound effects and other situations where you want very close control of the frequency and other characteristics of the sounds you're producing.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7278 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1422 \posy9589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-329 \absw3539 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s11 \posx1422 \posy9589 \phpg \pvpg \absh-329 \absw3539 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-276 \tx50 \tqr \tx3488 The Simple Version of SOUND\par 
}\pard \sl-276 \tx50 \tqr \tx3488 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1404 \posy9978 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1092 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s12 \posx1404 \posy9978 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1092 \absw7335 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7284 In its simplest form, SOUND can be used to set only the frequency and duration of a sound. You must also specify which voice is to be used, since every sound produced must be made by one of SID's three voices. For instance, the program line\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7284 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx833 \posy11275 \phpg \pvpg \absh-286 \absw2891 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs22 \f3 \pard \s13 \posx833 \posy11275 \phpg \pvpg \absh-286 \absw2891 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-232 \tx50 \tqr \tx2840 100 SOUND 2, 4291, 60\par 
}\pard \sl-232 \tx50 \tqr \tx2840 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11298 \posy647 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2370 \absw7327 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s14 \posx11298 \posy647 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2370 \absw7327 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri63 \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx7263 will cause a tone with the frequency of middle C to be played by voice number \fs22 \f3 2 \fs25 \f1 for one second. Lets look at the three parameters used in this statement.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s15 \posx11298 \posy647 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2370 \absw7327 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li68 \fi437 \ri55 \sl-256 \tx68 \tx505 \tqr \tx7271 The first parameter in SOUND (the \fs22 \f3 2 \fs25 \f1 in this case) specifies the voice. The range of choices here is from 1 to \fs22 \f3 3.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s16 \posx11298 \posy647 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2370 \absw7327 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li63 \fi437 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx63 \tx500 \tqr \tx7276 The second parameter is the frequency. This is a number from 0 to \fs22 \f3 65535. \fs25 \f1 Unfortunately, this number does not correspond to the actual frequency of the sound. However, it's related to it by the following simple formula:\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx63 \tx500 \tqr \tx7276 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx12941 \posy3022 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4166 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s17 \posx12941 \posy3022 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw4166 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4115 Parameter value = Frequency / \fs22 \f3 0.06097\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx4115 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11330 \posy3563 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1877 \absw7317 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s18 \posx11330 \posy3563 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1877 \absw7317 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri55 \sl-250 \tx50 \tqr \tx7261 Thus while the range of values for the frequency parameter runs from 0 to \fs22 \f3 65535, \fs25 \f1 the range of actual frequencies runs from 0 to about \fs22 \f3 4000 cps \fs25 \f1 (although values below about \fs22 \f3 40 cps will \fs25 \f1 sound more like a series of clicks than a tone).\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s19 \posx11330 \posy3563 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1877 \absw7317 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi436 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx56 \tx492 \tqr \tx7266 Middle C on the musical scale has a frequency of \fs22 \f3 262 cps, so, \fs25 \f1 dividing this number by \fs22 \f3 0.06097, \fs25 \f1 we find the value of the parameter to generate this note is \fs22 \f3 4297. \fs25 \f1 Table \fs22 \f3 7\_1 \fs25 \f1 shows the frequencies and parameter values\par 
}\pard \sl-263 \tx56 \tx492 \tqr \tx7266 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11892 \posy6275 \phpg \pvpg \absh-556 \absw6298 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \b \pard \s20 \posx11892 \posy6275 \phpg \pvpg \absh-556 \absw6298 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx6247 Table 7\_1. Frequencies and Frequency\_parameter Values for\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s21 \posx11892 \posy6275 \phpg \pvpg \absh-556 \absw6298 \dxfrtext200 \li2400 \ri2275 \sl-261 \tx2400 \tx2450 \tqc \tx3177 \tx4923 \tqc \tx5958 \tqr \tx4022 \tab \tab Musical Notes\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx2400 \tx2450 \tqc \tx3177 \tx4923 \tqc \tx5958 \tqr \tx4022 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11634 \posy7060 \phpg \pvpg \absh-801 \absw6923 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \fs21 \f0 \i \plain \i \fs21 \lang1033 \pard \s22 \posx11634 \posy7060 \phpg \pvpg \absh-801 \absw6923 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-258 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3345 \tx5181 \tqc \tx6216 \tqr \tx6872 \tab \tab \tab \tab Sound\par 
\pard \s22 \posx11634 \posy7060 \phpg \pvpg \absh-801 \absw6923 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-258 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3345 \tx5181 \tqc \tx6216 \tqr \tx6872 \tab \tab Actual\tab \tab Frequency\par 
\pard \s22 \posx11634 \posy7060 \phpg \pvpg \absh-801 \absw6923 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-258 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3345 \tx5181 \tqc \tx6216 \tqr \tx6872 \tab Note\tab Frequenc,v\tab \tab Parameters\par 
}\pard \sl-258 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3345 \tx5181 \tqc \tx6216 \tqr \tx6872 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \fs22 \f3 \fs22 \f3 \plain \fs22 \f3 \lang1033 \pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab C\tab 262\tab \tab 4297\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab C#\tab 277\tab \tab 4543\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab D\tab 294\tab \tab 4822\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab D#\tab 311\tab \tab 5100\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab E\tab 330\tab \tab 5412\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab F\tab 349\tab \tab 5724\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab F#\tab 370\tab \tab 6069\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab G\tab 392\tab `\tab 6429\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab G#\tab 415\tab \tab 6807\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab A\tab 440\tab \tab 7217\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab A#\tab 466\tab \tab 7643\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab B\tab 494\tab \tab 8102\par 
\pard \s23 \posx11774 \posy8067 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3178 \absw6548 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \tab C\tab 523\tab \tab 8578\par 
}\pard \sl-241 \tx50 \tx100 \tqc \tx3205 \tx5041 \tqc \tx6076 \tqr \tx6497 \fs24 \f0 \page \lndscpsxn {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx57 \tqr \tx7287 \qj \li10589 \ri50 \sl251 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2305;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7283 \qj \li10596 \fi441 \ri54 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2306;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx3746 \ql \sl276 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2307;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7281 \qj \li10596 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2308;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx3744 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2309;}
{\s7 \tx100 \tx792 \tx1148 \tqc \tx2029 \tx2365 \tx2736 \tx3463 \tx3949 \tx4314 \tqr \tx6121 \ql \sl337 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #2310;}
{\s8 \tx100 \tx200 \tx401 \tqc \tx1282 \tx1618 \tx1989 \tx2716 \tx3202 \tx3567 \tqr \tx1672 \ql \sl117 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #2311;}
{\s9 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 \ql \sl221 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #2312;}
{\s10 \tqr \tx1507 \ql \li10596 \ri50 \sl220 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #2313;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx2538 \ql \li10596 \ri50 \sl255 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #2314;}
{\s12 \tx159 \tqr \tx1728 \ql \sl219 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext12 OmniPage #2315;}
{\s13 \tqr \tx2998 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext13 OmniPage #2316;}
{\s14 \tqr \tx2021 \ql \sl261 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext14 OmniPage #2317;}
{\s15 \tqr \tx1744 \ql \sl181 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext15 OmniPage #2318;}
{\s16 \tx492 \tqr \tx7282 \qj \li10596 \fi442 \ri67 \sl256 \sbasedon0 \snext16 OmniPage #2319;}
{\s17 \tx60 \tx502 \tqr \tx7268 \qj \li10586 \fi442 \ri81 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext17 OmniPage #2320;}
{\s18 \tx59 \tx501 \tqr \tx7281 \qj \li10587 \fi442 \ri68 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext18 OmniPage #2321;}
{\s19 \tx80 \tx522 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li10566 \fi442 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext19 OmniPage #2322;}
{\s20 \tx81 \tx523 \tqr \tx7269 \qj \li10565 \fi442 \ri80 \sl245 \sbasedon0 \snext20 OmniPage #2323;}
{\s21 \tx50 \tqr \tx4782 \ql \sl222 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext21 OmniPage #2324;}
{\s22 \tx492 \tqr \tx7264 \qj \li10596 \fi442 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext22 OmniPage #2325;}
{\s23 \tx50 \tqr \tx4543 \ql \sl216 \li10596 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext23 OmniPage #2326;}
{\s24 \tx492 \tqr \tx7271 \qj \li10596 \fi442 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext24 OmniPage #2327;}
}\par {\pard \posx1586 \posy397 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2112 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1586 \posy397 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2112 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li57 \ri50 \sl-251 \tx57 \tqr \tx7287 for the notes in the octave starting with middle C. The notes in the next higher octave can be found by doubling these values, and the notes in the octave below can be found by dividing them by 2.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1586 \posy397 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2112 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri54 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7283 The third parameter in the sound statement is the duration. This is the length of time the sound will last, expressed in units of 1/60 of a second. Thus if this parameter is set to 60, the sound will last for one second. A setting of 30 will give you 1/2 second, a setting of 120 will give you two seconds, and so on.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \lndscpsxn \marglsxn958 \margrsxn1442 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7283 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1604 \posy2705 \phpg \pvpg \absh-329 \absw3797 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx1604 \posy2705 \phpg \pvpg \absh-329 \absw3797 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-276 \tx50 \tqr \tx3746 Setting the Sweep and Waveform\par 
}\pard \sl-276 \tx50 \tqr \tx3746 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1580 \posy3098 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1092 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx1580 \posy3098 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1092 \absw7332 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7281 The SOUND statement can be used just as we've shown it above, with only three parameters. However, it can also be used to specify the sweep and the waveform of the sound. Figure 7\_6 shows a SOUND statement with all the parameters identified.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7281 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3395 \posy4639 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3795 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \b \pard \s6 \posx3395 \posy4639 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3795 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3744 Figure 7\_6. The SOUND Statement\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3744 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1008 \posy5245 \phpg \pvpg \absh-989 \absw6172 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f2 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s7 \posx1008 \posy5245 \phpg \pvpg \absh-989 \absw6172 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-337 \tx50 \tx100 \tx792 \tx1148 \tqc \tx2029 \tx2365 \tx2736 \tx3463 \tx3949 \tx4314 \tqr \tx6121 \tab SOUND\tab 1,\tab 2145,\tab 30,\tab o,\tab 1072,\tab 50.\tab 2,\tab 204\par 
\pard \s7 \posx1008 \posy5245 \phpg \pvpg \absh-989 \absw6172 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-337 \tx50 \tx100 \tx792 \tx1148 \tqc \tx2029 \tx2365 \tx2736 \tx3463 \tx3949 \tx4314 \tqr \tx6121 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab _ _\tab \tab \tab Pulse width\par 
\fs20 \f3 \pard \s7 \posx1008 \posy5245 \phpg \pvpg \absh-989 \absw6172 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-337 \tx50 \tx100 \tx792 \tx1148 \tqc \tx2029 \tx2365 \tx2736 \tx3463 \tx3949 \tx4314 \tqr \tx6121 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab (0\_4095)\par 
}\pard \sl-337 \tx50 \tx100 \tx792 \tx1148 \tqc \tx2029 \tx2365 \tx2736 \tx3463 \tx3949 \tx4314 \tqr \tx6121 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1755 \posy10915 \phpg \pvpg \absh-261 \absw1723 \dxfrtext200 \fs20 \f3 \pard \s8 \posx1755 \posy10915 \phpg \pvpg \absh-261 \absw1723 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-117 \tx50 \tx100 \tx200 \tx401 \tqc \tx1282 \tx1618 \tx1989 \tx2716 \tx3202 \tx3567 \tqr \tx1672 \tab \tab I\tab \tab `,_,_\par 
}\pard \sl-117 \tx50 \tx100 \tx200 \tx401 \tqc \tx1282 \tx1618 \tx1989 \tx2716 \tx3202 \tx3567 \tqr \tx1672 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5508 \posy6376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1197 \absw1952 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx5508 \posy6376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1197 \absw1952 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-221 \tx50 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 \_Waveform\par 
\pard \s9 \posx5508 \posy6376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1197 \absw1952 \dxfrtext200 \li189 \ri50 \sl-221 \tx50 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 0 = Triangle\par 
\pard \s9 \posx5508 \posy6376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1197 \absw1952 \dxfrtext200 \li189 \ri50 \sl-221 \tx50 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 1 = Sawtooth\par 
\fs20 \f3 \pard \s9 \posx5508 \posy6376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1197 \absw1952 \dxfrtext200 \li189 \ri50 \sl-221 \tx50 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 2 = \fs25 \f0 Variable Pulse\par 
\fs20 \f3 \pard \s9 \posx5508 \posy6376 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1197 \absw1952 \dxfrtext200 \li189 \ri50 \sl-221 \tx50 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 3 = \fs25 \f0 Noise\par 
}\pard \sl-221 \tx50 \tx189 \tqr \tx1901 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5210 \posy7700 \phpg \pvpg \absh-517 \absw1558 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s10 \posx5210 \posy7700 \phpg \pvpg \absh-517 \absw1558 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-220 \tx50 \tqr \tx1507 Sweep step size \fs20 \f3 (0\_32767)\par 
}\pard \sl-220 \tx50 \tqr \tx1507 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4858 \posy8357 \phpg \pvpg \absh-552 \absw2589 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s11 \posx4858 \posy8357 \phpg \pvpg \absh-552 \absw2589 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx2538 Minimum sweep frequency \fs20 \f3 (0\_65535)\par 
}\pard \sl-255 \tx50 \tqr \tx2538 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4373 \posy9020 \phpg \pvpg \absh-971 \absw1779 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s12 \posx4373 \posy9020 \phpg \pvpg \absh-971 \absw1779 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-219 \tx50 \tx159 \tqr \tx1728 \_Sweep direction\par 
\pard \s12 \posx4373 \posy9020 \phpg \pvpg \absh-971 \absw1779 \dxfrtext200 \li159 \ri50 \sl-219 \tx50 \tx159 \tqr \tx1728 O=Up\par 
\pard \s12 \posx4373 \posy9020 \phpg \pvpg \absh-971 \absw1779 \dxfrtext200 \li159 \ri50 \sl-219 \tx50 \tx159 \tqr \tx1728 1 = Down\par 
\fs20 \f3 \pard \s12 \posx4373 \posy9020 \phpg \pvpg \absh-971 \absw1779 \dxfrtext200 \li159 \ri50 \sl-219 \tx50 \tx159 \tqr \tx1728 2 = \fs25 \f0 Oscillating\par 
}\pard \sl-219 \tx50 \tx159 \tqr \tx1728 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3847 \posy10112 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3049 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s13 \posx3847 \posy10112 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3049 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2998 Duration (sixtieths of a second)\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2998 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3340 \posy10554 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2072 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s14 \posx3340 \posy10554 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw2072 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2021 Frequency \fs20 \f3 (0\_65535)\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx2021 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2695 \posy11022 \phpg \pvpg \absh-261 \absw1795 \dxfrtext200 \fs20 \f3 \pard \s15 \posx2695 \posy11022 \phpg \pvpg \absh-261 \absw1795 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-181 \tx50 \tqr \tx1744 \_vulce(1,2,or3)\par 
}\pard \sl-181 \tx50 \tqr \tx1744 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11310 \posy406 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5219 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s16 \posx11310 \posy406 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5219 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi442 \ri67 \sl-256 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7282 When \fs25 \f2 \b the sweep \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 parameters are used, the note will start at one \fs25 \f2 \b frequency and move \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 up or down to another frequency as it's being played. To cause this sweep to take place you must specify three parameters in \fs25 \f2 \b addition to voice, \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 frequency and duration. These new parameters are sweep direction, minimum sweep frequency, and sweep step size.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s17 \posx11310 \posy406 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5219 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi442 \ri81 \sl-258 \tx60 \tx502 \tqr \tx7268 Sweep direction specifies whether you want the sound to sweep up in frequency while it's being played (a value of 0), to sweep down (a value of 1), or to oscillate between a high and low value (a value of 2).\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s18 \posx11310 \posy406 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5219 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \fi442 \ri68 \sl-260 \tx59 \tx501 \tqr \tx7281 The minimum sweep frequency specifies the lower of the two fre\-quencies used for the sweep: the sound will either sweep down to this frequency from the value specified in the original frequency parameter (if you specified down as the direction), or it will start at the minimum frequency and sweep upward (if you specified up as the direction). If you specified the oscillating mode, the pitch of the sound will oscillate be\-tween the two values.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s19 \posx11310 \posy406 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5219 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li80 \fi442 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx80 \tx522 \tqr \tx7299 The sweep step size determines how rapidly the sweep will take place. Although this parameter can have a value as high as 32,767, it is often used with values in the hundreds or lower.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s20 \posx11310 \posy406 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5219 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li81 \fi442 \ri80 \sl-245 \tx81 \tx523 \tqr \tx7269 The following short program will cause the frequency to sweep down through one octave, to middle C, using a frequency step size of 100:\par 
}\pard \sl-245 \tx81 \tx523 \tqr \tx7269 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx10779 \posy5877 \phpg \pvpg \absh-483 \absw4833 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs20 \f3 \pard \s21 \posx10779 \posy5877 \phpg \pvpg \absh-483 \absw4833 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-222 \tx50 \tqr \tx4782 100 VOL 15\par 
\pard \s21 \posx10779 \posy5877 \phpg \pvpg \absh-483 \absw4833 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-222 \tx50 \tqr \tx4782 110 SOUND 2, 8578, 60, 1, 4291, 100, 0\par 
}\pard \sl-222 \tx50 \tqr \tx4782 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11336 \posy6570 \phpg \pvpg \absh-839 \absw7315 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s22 \posx11336 \posy6570 \phpg \pvpg \absh-839 \absw7315 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi442 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7264 For the sound of a police siren, try this program, which uses the oscillating sweep between the frequency parameters of 30000 and 40000, for 5 seconds:\par 
}\pard \sl-263 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7264 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx10787 \posy7644 \phpg \pvpg \absh-477 \absw4594 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs20 \f3 \pard \s23 \posx10787 \posy7644 \phpg \pvpg \absh-477 \absw4594 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-216 \tx50 \tqr \tx4543 100 VOL 15\par 
\pard \s23 \posx10787 \posy7644 \phpg \pvpg \absh-477 \absw4594 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-216 \tx50 \tqr \tx4543 110 SOUND 1, 40000, 300, 2, 30000, 1\par 
}\pard \sl-216 \tx50 \tqr \tx4543 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx11347 \posy8341 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2404 \absw7322 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s24 \posx11347 \posy8341 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2404 \absw7322 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi442 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7271 You can also use the SOUND statement to select one of the four waveforms the SID chip is capable of generating: triangle, sawtooth, var\-iable pulse, or white noise. If you select the variable pulse waveform, then you must also specify the pulse width. This parameter can run from 0 to 4095. When its value is half the maximum, or 2048, the wave shape is that of a square wave, and the sound produced has the "fullest" or most sonorous quality. Values close to this are often used to imitate the sound of a piano. Other values for the pulse width make a sharper, more buzzy sound.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7271 \fs24 \f0 }