{\rtf1\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Times New Roman;}
{\f1\froman Times New Roman;}{\f2\fmodern MS LineDraw;}{\f3\fdecor Symbol;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\paperh3118 \margl3806 \margr975 \margt1823 \margb1440 \plain \lang1033 {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx3925 \ql \sl564 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx7309 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2;}
}{\pard \posx4303 \posy3138 \phpg \pvpg \absh-698 \absw3976 \dxfrtext200 \fs49 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx4303 \posy3138 \phpg \pvpg \absh-698 \absw3976 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-564 \tx50 \tqr \tx3925 A\'a3kn~vle~pnents\par 
}\linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn7285 \pgwsxn12240 \pard \sl-564 \tx50 \tqr \tx3925 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3856 \posy5051 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2135 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx3856 \posy5051 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2135 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of the following people, without whom this book could neither have been written in the first place, nor changed from a manuscript into an actual product: Jim Gracely and Bob Kenny of Commodore Business Machines; Damon Davis, Phil Debrabant, Esther Eisman, John Obst, and Barbara Sams of Howard W. Sams, Inc.; and Lyn Cordell and Joan Frank of The Waite Group. AH these people made sacrifices far beyond the call of duty; we salute their dedication.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx3100 \ql \sl376 \li3756 \ri4825 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #257;}
{\s3 \tx637 \tqr \tx7872 \qj \li3169 \ri53 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #258;}
{\s4 \tx642 \tx1081 \tqr \tx7870 \qj \li3164 \fi439 \ri55 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #259;}
{\s5 \tx642 \tx1081 \tqr \tx7875 \qj \li3164 \fi439 \ri50 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #260;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tqr \tx3530 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #261;}
}\par {\pard \posx1909 \posy1913 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5512 \absw7926 \dxfrtext200 \fs34 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1909 \posy1913 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5512 \absw7926 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri4825 \sl-376 \tx50 \tqr \tx3100 What's in This Book\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx1909 \posy1913 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5512 \absw7926 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li637 \ri53 \sl-260 \tx637 \tqr \tx7872 This book describes the features of the Commodore 128, what it does, how it does it, and what kinds of things you can use it for. In this first chapter we'll give you a quick overview of the Commodore 128, explaining how it came to be and what its major features are. In later chapters we'll go into more detail about particular features of the C128, and how to use these features. We'll discuss the kinds of external devices (peripherals) you may need to operate the Commodore 128, and then we'll explore in some detail the three modes of operation available: the C128 mode, the C64 mode, and the CP/M mode. We'll finish up with chapters describing the sound and graphics capabilities of the C128, and how to make use of them in your own programs.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx1909 \posy1913 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5512 \absw7926 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li642 \fi439 \ri55 \sl-259 \tx642 \tx1081 \tqr \tx7870 Our purpose in this book is not to give you an entire course in computers from the ground up, nor to teach you the fundamentals of BASIC or computer programming. Rather, we focus on those features of the Com\-modore 128 that make it unique and interesting.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx1909 \posy1913 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5512 \absw7926 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li642 \fi439 \ri50 \sl-262 \tx642 \tx1081 \tqr \tx7875 From time to time in this book we'll mention the names of manufac\-turers of peripheral equipment and software, as well as organizations that are involved in the Commodore industry. The addresses of these manu\-facturers and organizations will be found in the back of the book.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn8351 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1859 \margrsxn2356 \pard \sl-262 \tx642 \tx1081 \tqr \tx7875 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4428 \posy7940 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3581 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \b \pard \s6 \posx4428 \posy7940 \phpg \pvpg \absh-312 \absw3581 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3530 Figure 1\_1. The Commodore 128\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3530 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7283 \ql \li3756 \fi438 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #513;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tqr \tx2488 \qc \sl291 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #514;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx6574 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #515;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx3261 \qc \sl363 \li3756 \ri4697 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #516;}
{\s6 \tx58 \tqr \tx3727 \ql \sl363 \li3748 \ri4231 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #517;}
{\s7 \tx644 \tqr \tx7894 \qj \li3162 \ri64 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #518;}
{\s8 \tx646 \tx1084 \tqr \tx7908 \qj \li3160 \fi438 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #519;}
{\s9 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7302 \qj \li3756 \fi438 \ri50 \sl263 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #520;}
}\par {\pard \posx4435 \posy1587 \phpg \pvpg \absh-838 \absw7334 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx4435 \posy1587 \phpg \pvpg \absh-838 \absw7334 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \fi438 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7283 If you have bought a Commodore 128, or if you are thinking of buying one, this book should answer most of your questions concerning the operation of the computer and whether it can do what you want.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12659 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3780 \margrsxn402 \pard \sl-263 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7283 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx6875 \posy3059 \phpg \pvpg \absh-332 \absw2539 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs26 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx6875 \posy3059 \phpg \pvpg \absh-332 \absw2539 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-291 \tx50 \tqr \tx2488 A Word about Names\par 
}\pard \sl-291 \tx50 \tqr \tx2488 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4782 \posy3454 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2401 \absw6625 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx4782 \posy3454 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2401 \absw6625 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx6574 In a computer that contains three other computers, it's easy to get confused about whether you mean the main computer case or the individual computers inside. Commodore refers to the inside com\-puters as modes, and that's what we'll do in this book. The main computer we'll refer to as the Commodore 128, or as the C128, for short. The three modes built into it are the C128 mode, the C64 mode, and the \fs23 \f0 \i CP/M \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 mode. The earlier computer on which the Commodore 128 was based we'll call the Commodore 64, or the C64, for short.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx6574 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3830 \posy6495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5253 \absw7959 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs34 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx3830 \posy6495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5253 \absw7959 \dxfrtext200 \qc \li50 \ri4697 \sl-363 \tx50 \tqr \tx3261 The Commodore 128:\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs34 \f0 \pard \s6 \posx3830 \posy6495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5253 \absw7959 \dxfrtext200 \li58 \ri4231 \sl-363 \tx58 \tqr \tx3727 Three Computers in One\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx3830 \posy6495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5253 \absw7959 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li644 \ri64 \sl-261 \tx644 \tqr \tx7894 The main feature of the Commodore 128\'97what sets it apart from almost every other computer ever manufactured\'97is that it is really three sepa\-rate computers packed into one case. These three computers share the same keyboard, and can share external equipment, like the display screen and disk drives; so that when the C128 is sitting on your desk it may look as if there is only one computer system there. However, buried inside its handsome case there are really three separate computers, as shown some\-what fancifully in Figure 1\_2. What are these three computers, and why did Commodore put them together in one case?\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx3830 \posy6495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5253 \absw7959 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li646 \fi438 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx646 \tx1084 \tqr \tx7908 The first computer hidden inside the Commodore 128 is a faithful copy of an earlier computer: the Commodore 64. Introduced in 1982, the C64 turned out to be one of the most successful home computers of all time, with sales of over three million (and still climbing). The C64 was successful because it offered excellent color graphics and sound, which made it a perfect computer for such applications as education and enter\-tainment. It was also, with its built\_in Microsoft BASIC, easy for users to learn to program, and, most importantly, it was priced below the competition.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx646 \tx1084 \tqr \tx7908 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4435 \posy11748 \phpg \pvpg \absh-812 \absw7353 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx4435 \posy11748 \phpg \pvpg \absh-812 \absw7353 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi438 \ri50 \sl-263 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7302 Because the Commodore 64 was so successful, a large software in\-dustry grew up to support it. Today there are more than six thousand programs which run on the C64, with new ones being written every day.\par 
}\pard \sl-263 \tx50 \tx488 \tqr \tx7302 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx59 \tqr \tx7269 \qj \li3747 \ri93 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #769;}
{\s3 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7304 \qj \li3756 \fi442 \ri58 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #770;}
{\s4 \tx57 \tx499 \tqr \tx7298 \qj \li3749 \fi442 \ri64 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #771;}
{\s5 \tx60 \tx502 \tqr \tx7312 \qj \li3746 \fi442 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #772;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tqr \tx3924 \qc \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #773;}
}\par {\pard \posx1736 \posy1594 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6309 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx1736 \posy1594 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6309 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li59 \ri93 \sl-260 \tx59 \tqr \tx7269 As we'll see, this huge existing software base has played a major part in the evolution of the Commodore 128.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx1736 \posy1594 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6309 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi442 \ri58 \sl-261 \tx50 \tx492 \tqr \tx7304 The Commodore 64 was not without its faults. For one thing, the speed at which the disk system could transfer data was woefully slow. Users who needed to load a really long program or data file from a disk got used to brewing a cup of coffee while the transfer took place. Also, the C64 could display only 40 characters on one line of the screen. This was fine for simple business programs and for games, but users who wanted to use professional\_quality software needed a screen capable of displaying 80 columns, the industry standard.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx1736 \posy1594 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6309 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li57 \fi442 \ri64 \sl-260 \tx57 \tx499 \tqr \tx7298 Commodore, in the face of competition from other home computer manufacturers, wanted to introduce a new computer which, using more advanced technology, would eliminate some of the problems found on the C64. However, because there were so many Commodore 64 programs in existence, they did not want a new machine which would be unable to run these programs. The millions of people who had invested heavily in programs designed to run on the C64 would not look kindly on a computer that was supposed to improve on the C64 but would not run the existing software.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx1736 \posy1594 \phpg \pvpg \absh-6309 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li60 \fi442 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx60 \tx502 \tqr \tx7312 However, it is difficult to make a computer better, without at the same time making it different. If Commodore made major changes in the Com\-modore 64, then the new computer would not have been able to run the old C64 programs. Many manufacturers have wrestled with this problem, and decided on one course or another: compatibility versus innovation.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn8819 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1686 \margrsxn3092 \pard \sl-260 \tx60 \tx502 \tqr \tx7312 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3469 \posy8404 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw3975 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \b \pard \s6 \posx3469 \posy8404 \phpg \pvpg \absh-316 \absw3975 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3924 Figure \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 ~\_2. \fs25 \f1 \b Three Computers in One\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx3924 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li3756 \ri70 \sl257 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1025;}
{\s3 \tx493 \tqr \tx7312 \qj \li3756 \fi443 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1026;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx5846 \ql \li3756 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1027;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx2034 \ql \sl327 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1028;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx7322 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1029;}
{\s7 \tx55 \tx498 \tqr \tx7312 \qj \li3751 \fi443 \ri60 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1030;}
{\s8 \tx69 \tx512 \tqr \tx7312 \qj \li3737 \fi443 \ri60 \sl262 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1031;}
}\par {\pard \posx3911 \posy1513 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2916 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx3911 \posy1513 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2916 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri70 \sl-257 \tx50 \tqr \tx7292 Commodore decided to have their cake and eat it too: in one machine they would combine both the old C64, and a new computer called the C128, which would be similar to the C64, but better.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx3911 \posy1513 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2916 \absw7363 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi443 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx493 \tqr \tx7312 As we noted earlier, these two computers\_within\_a\_computer are re\-ferred to as modes: the C64 mode, which lets the Commodore 128 emulate a Commodore 64; and the C128 mode, which is an entirely new computer with many enhancements and improvements over the C64. In addition to the C64 and C128 modes, Commodore added a third mode: the CP/M mode, which turns the Commodore 128 into a serious business computer. We'll describe these modes briefly here, and explore them in more detail in the chapters to come.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn11578 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3855 \margrsxn913 \pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx493 \tqr \tx7312 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4637 \posy4646 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1092 \absw5897 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \i \pard \s4 \posx4637 \posy4646 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1092 \absw5897 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx5846 It is difficult to make a computer better without, at the same time, making it different. Mu will soon see why the Commodore 128 is both\'97a different computer, and a better one.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx5846 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3934 \posy6044 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw2085 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs29 \f0 \pard \s5 \posx3934 \posy6044 \phpg \pvpg \absh-382 \absw2085 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-327 \tx50 \tqr \tx2034 The C64 Mode\par 
}\pard \sl-327 \tx50 \tqr \tx2034 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3905 \posy6470 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5009 \absw7373 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s6 \posx3905 \posy6470 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5009 \absw7373 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7322 As we noted, the Commodore 64 featured excellent color graphics and sound; in fact, the most advanced in the industry for a home computer. The color graphics made use of sprites\'97sophisticated, intelligent graph\-ics entities which could be programmed to represent objects like race cars and space ships. These sprites could be told to move anywhere on the screen and they would do so automatically, without slowing the program down. The sound\_generating capability provided amazing versatility for a machine in this price range, including three voices and a wide variety of ways to shape the sound to produce almost any imaginable effect, from musical instruments to space ships to the human voice.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx3905 \posy6470 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5009 \absw7373 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li55 \fi443 \ri60 \sl-260 \tx55 \tx498 \tqr \tx7312 All these features have been retained in the C64 mode of the Com\-modore 128. In fact, in C64 mode the Commodore 128 is almost identical to the old Commodore 64. It will run all the same software. The screen display is the same, the keyboard operates the same way, and the disk drives and other peripherals that worked on the C64 will work the same way on the C128.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx3905 \posy6470 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5009 \absw7373 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li69 \fi443 \ri60 \sl-262 \tx69 \tx512 \tqr \tx7312 If you are a Commodore 64 owner you'll find this mode invaluable, because all your software will work on the new machine, without any modification, just as it did on the old one. Even if you never owned a\par 
}\pard \sl-262 \tx69 \tx512 \tqr \tx7312 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7294 \ql \li3756 \ri50 \sl259 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1281;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx2421 \ql \sl355 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1282;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx7324 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl264 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1283;}
{\s5 \tx52 \tqr \tx3585 \ql \sl319 \li3754 \ri3768 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1284;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tqr \tx7303 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl265 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1285;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx2377 \ql \sl319 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1286;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7297 \qj \li3756 \ri54 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1287;}
{\s9 \tx56 \tx490 \tqr \tx7301 \qj \li3750 \fi434 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext9 OmniPage #1288;}
{\s10 \tx50 \tqr \tx2854 \ql \sl319 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext10 OmniPage #1289;}
{\s11 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext11 OmniPage #1290;}
}\par {\pard \posx2143 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-831 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx2143 \posy1591 \phpg \pvpg \absh-831 \absw7345 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7294 Commodore C64, you'll still profit from the C64 mode, because you'll be able to buy and use any of the thousands of programs already written for the Commodore 64. This mode will be discussed further in Chapter 4.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12690 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn1494 \margrsxn2694 \pard \sl-259 \tx50 \tqr \tx7294 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx1544 \posy2669 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw2472 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f1 \pard \s3 \posx1544 \posy2669 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw2472 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx2421 The C128 Mode\par 
}\pard \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx2421 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2122 \posy3131 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1900 \absw7375 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx2122 \posy3131 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1900 \absw7375 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-264 \tx50 \tqr \tx7324 The C128 mode is, in effect, a brand new computer inside the Commodore 128. What improvements does this mode offer over the C64 mode? We've already mentioned two areas where the Commodore 64 needed improve\-ment: the slow disk access, and the lack of an 80\_column screen display. The C128 mode eliminates both problems, offering both much faster disk access and the choice\'97with the push of a button\'97of either 80\_column or 40\_column color displays.\par 
}\pard \sl-264 \tx50 \tqr \tx7324 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2141 \posy5333 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2046 \absw7354 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f0 \i \pard \s5 \posx2141 \posy5333 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2046 \absw7354 \dxfrtext200 \li52 \ri3768 \sl-319 \tx52 \tqr \tx3585 Disk Data Transfer Speed\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s6 \posx2141 \posy5333 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2046 \absw7354 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-265 \tx50 \tqr \tx7303 Data transfer times using the disk have been increased more than five times. This is possible using an entirely new family of accessory drives for the C128. These new drives are called the Commodore 1571 and 1572. The 1571 (shown with other peripherals in Figure 1\_3) is a single drive, and the 1572 is a dual\_drive unit. These drives will be discussed in more detail in the chapter on peripherals.\par 
}\pard \sl-265 \tx50 \tqr \tx7303 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2156 \posy7686 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2428 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f0 \i \pard \s7 \posx2156 \posy7686 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2428 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2377 80\_Column Mode\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2377 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2138 \posy8107 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2660 \absw7352 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s8 \posx2138 \posy8107 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2660 \absw7352 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri54 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7297 There are two different screen displays on the Commodore 128: 40\_col\-umn, and 80\_column, selected by a key on the keyboard. The 80\_column display makes possible the use of much more sophisticated business\-oriented software on the Commodore 128 than was possible on the Com\-modore 64. Note that not all monitors will work in 80\_column mode; we'll have more to say about this in the next chapter.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s9 \posx2138 \posy8107 \phpg \pvpg \absh-2660 \absw7352 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li56 \fi434 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx56 \tx490 \tqr \tx7301 The innovations introduced by the C128 mode don't end with faster disk access and the 80\_column screen display. In addition, there is a vastly improved BASIC, increased memory capacity, and a machine language monitor, to name only the most obvious improvements.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx56 \tx490 \tqr \tx7301 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2145 \posy11065 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2905 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f0 \i \pard \s10 \posx2145 \posy11065 \phpg \pvpg \absh-372 \absw2905 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2854 Advanced BASIC 7.0\par 
}\pard \sl-319 \tx50 \tqr \tx2854 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2143 \posy11495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s11 \posx2143 \posy11495 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 Most home computers come with a programming language built in, so that users can learn programming, write their own programs, or customize programs written by others. The standard language built into most small computers is BASIC, which is probably the easiest programming language\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7298 \qj \li3756 \ri56 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1537;}
{\s3 \tx55 \tx490 \tqr \tx7304 \qj \li3751 \fi435 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1538;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx4296 \qc \sl253 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1539;}
}\par {\pard \posx4139 \posy1690 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3968 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx4139 \posy1690 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3968 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri56 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7298 to learn. The version of BASIC built into the Commodore 64, called BASIC 2.0, in general served very well, but it had some drawbacks. For one thing, it was difficult to take advantage of the excellent graphics and sound capabilities of the Commodore 64. Also, it was difficult to write programs in the modern "structured" style, since C64 BASIC did not have certain statements designed to make this kind of programming easy. Several accessories, notably Simons BASIC and SuperExpander, provided add\_on commands to improve the BASIC, but they were not a part of the standard language.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx4139 \posy1690 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3968 \absw7355 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li55 \fi435 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx55 \tx490 \tqr \tx7304 The new version of BASIC that is accessible from C128 mode, called BASIC 7.0, remedies these deficiencies and adds many other new features as well. It provides a greatly increased number of statements, including those that make modern structured programming easier, such as DO...LOOP, BEGIN...BEND, and IF...THEN...ELSE. Graphics is simplified by the ad\-dition of commands that let you instantly draw \fs24 \f1 \b circles, boxes, dots, and\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn6582 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn4089 \margrsxn697 \pard \sl-261 \tx55 \tx490 \tqr \tx7304 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx5696 \posy6165 \phpg \pvpg \absh-318 \absw4347 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs24 \f1 \pard \s4 \posx5696 \posy6165 \phpg \pvpg \absh-318 \absw4347 \dxfrtext200 \qc \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx4296 Figure \fs24 \f0 \plain \lang1033 1\_3. \fs24 \f1 \b The Commodore 128 Svstem\par 
}\pard \qc \sl-253 \tx50 \tqr \tx4296 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #1793;}
{\s3 \tx64 \tx506 \tqr \tx7288 \qj \li3742 \fi442 \ri61 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #1794;}
{\s4 \tx50 \tqr \tx2614 \ql \sl312 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #1795;}
{\s5 \tqr \tx7299 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #1796;}
{\s6 \tqr \tx2739 \ql \sl312 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #1797;}
{\s7 \tqr \tx7296 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #1798;}
{\s8 \tx51 \tx489 \tqr \tx7287 \qj \li3755 \fi438 \ri59 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #1799;}
}\par {\pard \posx2207 \posy1560 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3965 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s2 \posx2207 \posy1560 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3965 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 lines; fill areas with color; and split the screen into a text section and a graphics section. Sprites (the colored graphics objects which can be pro\-grammed to move independently on the screen, like race\_cars and space ships) are supported by simple commands which create sprites, move them, and check for collisions between them. There is even a built\_in sprite editor that lets you design sprites on the Commodore screen and then save them for use in a program. There are also better statements to use the disk system (the DOS, or Disk Operating System), and a variety of new statements to help make the programming process easier, like AUTO, to automatically number program lines; RENUM, to renumber program lines; and TRACE, to allow line\_by\_line analysis of a program's operation.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s3 \posx2207 \posy1560 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3965 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li64 \fi442 \ri61 \sl-260 \tx64 \tx506 \tqr \tx7288 In general, the new BASIC is a programmer's delight. It is probably the best and most powerful BASIC available to anyone buying a computer in the Commodore 128's price range.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn12145 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn2157 \margrsxn2630 \pard \sl-260 \tx64 \tx506 \tqr \tx7288 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2213 \posy5852 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw2665 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f1 \i \pard \s4 \posx2213 \posy5852 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw2665 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2614 Increased Memory\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2614 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2211 \posy6253 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s5 \posx2211 \posy6253 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1881 \absw7350 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 As its name implies, the Commodore 128 has 128K of memory, twice that of the Commodore 64. Because of various technicalities, the actual effect of this increased memory is that BASIC programs in C128 mode can be more than twice as large as they could be in C64 mode, as we'll discover in the chapter on C128 mode. And, if 128K of memory isn't enough, it's possible to expand it still further with optional plug\_in memory modules, up to a maximum of 512K.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7299 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2221 \posy8456 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw2790 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs30 \f1 \i \pard \s6 \posx2221 \posy8456 \phpg \pvpg \absh-348 \absw2790 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2739 Improved Keyboard\par 
}\pard \sl-312 \tx50 \tqr \tx2739 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx2214 \posy8861 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3185 \absw7347 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 \pard \s7 \posx2214 \posy8861 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3185 \absw7347 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7296 A numeric keypad (the number keys clustered together as they are on a calculator) is useful for anyone entering large amounts of numeric data, but this feature was lacking on the Commodore 64. Since many Commo\-dore 64 owners spent hours entering machine language programs in the form of long lists of numbers, this feature was often asked for. The Com\-modore 128 provides a full\_featured numeric keypad, built into the com\-\fs25 \f0 \b puter \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 on the right side of the keyboard.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s8 \posx2214 \posy8861 \phpg \pvpg \absh-3185 \absw7347 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \fi438 \ri59 \sl-261 \tx51 \tx489 \tqr \tx7287 In addition, the new keyboard has (among other new keys) additional cursor keys to make moving the cursor easier, a \fs25 \f0 \ul []i~1 \fs25 \f0 \plain \fs25 \lang1033 key to ask for explanatory messages from those programs that use this capability, and the 40\_column/80\_column key for switching between display modes. We'll talk more about the new keyboard in the chapter on the C128 mode.\par 
}\pard \sl-261 \tx51 \tx489 \tqr \tx7287 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx4822 \ql \sl304 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2049;}
{\s3 \tqr \tx7309 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl258 \sbasedon0 \snext3 OmniPage #2050;}
{\s4 \tqr \tx2474 \ql \sl355 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext4 OmniPage #2051;}
{\s5 \tx51 \tqr \tx7291 \qj \li3755 \ri51 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext5 OmniPage #2052;}
{\s6 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7292 \qj \li3756 \fi441 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext6 OmniPage #2053;}
{\s7 \tx50 \tqr \tx2566 \ql \sl355 \li3756 \ri50 \sbasedon0 \snext7 OmniPage #2054;}
{\s8 \tqr \tx7287 \qj \li3756 \ri50 \sl260 \sbasedon0 \snext8 OmniPage #2055;}
}\par {\pard \posx4111 \posy1626 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw4873 \dxfrtext200 \fs29 \f0 \i \pard \s2 \posx4111 \posy1626 \phpg \pvpg \absh-354 \absw4873 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx4822 Built\_in Machine Language Monitor\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \pghsxn11827 \pgwsxn12240 \marglsxn3476 \margrsxn723 \pard \sl-304 \tx50 \tqr \tx4822 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4108 \posy2046 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1345 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 \pard \s3 \posx4108 \posy2046 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1345 \absw7360 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-258 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 If you're a machine language or assembly language programmer, or even if you just like to explore various technical aspects of your computer, you'll appreciate this new feature of the Commodore 128: a built\_in monitor program that lets you assemble, disassemble, and debug assembly lan\-guage or machine language programs; and examine and modify memory.\par 
}\pard \sl-258 \tx50 \tqr \tx7309 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3526 \posy3638 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw2525 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f0 \pard \s4 \posx3526 \posy3638 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw2525 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx2474 The CP/M Mode\par 
}\pard \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx2474 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4111 \posy4120 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5004 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s5 \posx4111 \posy4120 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5004 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li51 \ri51 \sl-260 \tx51 \tqr \tx7291 As if two computers in one weren't enough, Commodore also added a third, entirely different mode, to the Commodore 128. This is the CP/M mode. CP/M stands for "Control Program for Microcomputers." It's a \fs25 \f0 \i disk \fs25 \f1 \plain \fs25 \f1 \lang1033 operating system (a program which controls disk operations) developed by Digital Research, Inc., and available since the early days of microcom\-puters, almost a decade ago. You'll learn more about what operating sys\-tems are in general and about CP/M in particular in Chapter 5.\par 
\fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s6 \posx4111 \posy4120 \phpg \pvpg \absh-5004 \absw7343 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \fi441 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7292 CP/M is an operating system that attempts to standardize program writing and usage, so that a program written to work on CP/M on one computer will work on CP/M on any other computer. CP/M has, in fact, been enormously successful, and tens of thousands of programs\'97mostly professional level business programs\'97have been written for it. Thus, by making CP/M available on the C128, Commodore is tapping into this vast reservoir of existing software. Since so much of this software is business\-oriented, the addition of CP/M (along with the 80\_column screen and faster disk drives) tranforms the Commodore 128 into a serious business\-oriented machine. Chapter 5 details some of the more popular CP/M programs. It also describes the great amount of free "public domain" software available for CP/M.\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tx491 \tqr \tx7292 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx3529 \posy9374 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw2617 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs32 \f0 \pard \s7 \posx3529 \posy9374 \phpg \pvpg \absh-442 \absw2617 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx2566 The Bottom Line\par 
}\pard \sl-355 \tx50 \tqr \tx2566 \fs24 \f0 {\pard \posx4123 \posy9852 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1876 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \fs10 \f0 \fs25 \f1 \pard \s8 \posx4123 \posy9852 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1876 \absw7338 \dxfrtext200 \qj \li50 \ri50 \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 If you're interested in owning one of the most versatile computers designed to date, with the ability to run thousands of existing educational, enter\-tainment, and other programs, with many new enhanced features, and at the same time, a computer that can serve as a serious business machine, the Commodore 128 represents an excellent value. In the chapters that follow, we'll tell you more about this computer and explore its capabilities in detail. We'll begin by discussing peripherals for the C128: display\par 
}\pard \sl-260 \tx50 \tqr \tx7287 \fs24 \f0 \page {\stylesheet {\snext0 Normal;}
{\s2 \tx50 \tqr \tx7286 \ql \li3756 \ri50 \sl261 \sbasedon0 \snext2 OmniPage #2305;}
}\par {\pard \posx2355 \posy1923 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7337 \dxfrtext200 \fs25 \f0 \pard \s2 \posx2355 \posy1923 \phpg \pvpg \absh-1096 \absw7337 \dxfrtext200 \li50 \ri50 \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7286 screens, disk drives, printers, and other external devices. Then we'll dis\-cuss the three modes available on the Commodore 128: the C128 mode, the C64 mode, and the CP/M mode; and finally we'll show you something about the C128's most exciting features: graphics and sound.\par 
}\sect \sectd \linex0 \linemod0 \sbknone \marglsxn2305 \margrsxn2499 \pard \sl-261 \tx50 \tqr \tx7286 \fs24 \f0 }