*********

Welcome to iDOC= - the international CBM documentation project!

The goal of iDOC= is to preserve (non-English) Commodore related documents
in electronic text format that might otherwise cease to exist with the rapid
advancement of computer technology and declining interest in 8-bit computers
on the part of the general population. If you would like to help by
converting Commodore related hardcopy documents to electronic texts please
contact the manager of iDOC=, Peter Krefting, at peter@softwolves.pp.se.

Extensive efforts were made to preserve the contents of the original
document. However, certain portions, such as diagrams, program listings, and
indexes may have been either altered or sacrificed due to the limitations of
plain vanilla text. Diagrams may have been eliminated where ASCII-art was
not feasible. Program listings may be missing display codes where
substitutions were not possible. Tables of contents and indexes may have
been changed from page number references to section number references.
Please accept our apologies for these limitations, alterations, and possible
omissions.

Document names consists of a reasonably short unique title, followed by the
document language. Two optional fields follow; first the document version (0
for incomplete texts, version 1 is usually unnumbered), and then the
document source, if there are more than one. Finally, the document is given
a .txt extension.

The author(s) of the original document and members of iDOC= make no
representations about the accuracy or suitability of this material for any
purpose. This etext is provided "as-is". Please refer to the warranty of the
original document, if any, that may included in this etext. No other
warranties, express or implied, are made to you as to the etext or any
medium it may be on. Neither the author(s) nor the members of iDOC= will
assume liability for damages either from the direct or indirect use of this
etext or from the distribution of or modification to this etext. Therefore
if you read this document or use the information herein you do so at your
own risk.

*********

The iDOC= etext of the xxxxxxxxxxxxxx, converted to text by xxxxxxxxxxxx
<xxxxxxxxxxxxxx>

nnnnnn.txt, Month Year, etext #NNN.

Note from the etexter: 

*********
